International Journal on ISSN 2077-3528
“Technical and Physical Problems of Engineering” IJTPE Journal
(IJTPE) www.iotpe.com
Published by International Organization of IOTPE ijtpe@iotpe.com
December 2024 Issue 61 Volume 16 Number 4 Pages 1-6
INTEGRATING NATURAL LANGUAGE PROCESSING TECHNIQUES OF
TEXT MINING INTO FINANCIAL SYSTEM: APPLICATIONS AND
LIMITATIONS
D. Millo B. Vika N. Baci
Statistics and Applied Informatics Department, Faculty of Economy, University of Tirana, Tirana, Albania
denisa.millo@unitir.edu.al, blerina.vika@unitir.edu.al, nevila.baci@unitir.edu.al
Abstract- The financial sector, a pivotal force in economic For the scope of this research paper, we refer to the Finance
development, increasingly uses the intelligent field as the Financial System (FS) as it encompasses
technologies such as natural language processing to various components such as; public finance, international
enhance data processing and insight extraction. This finance, corporate finance, derivatives, risk management,
research paper through a review process of the time span portfolio theory, asset pricing (AP), and financial
of 2018-2023 explores the use of text mining as natural economics [1].
language processing techniques in various components of A detailed view of the search methods and machine
the financial system including asset pricing, corporate learning tools in language processing, including classifiers
finance, derivatives, risk management, and public finance and sequence models, techniques like decision trees (DT),
and highlights the need to address the specific problems in support vector machines (SVM), and cross-validation is
the discussion section. We notice that most of the research essential for evaluating NLP systems [2]. We will give
materials combined probabilistic with vector-space examples of the use of NLP techniques in the next sections
models, and text-data with numerical ones. The most used
in this research, enhancing their understanding by
technique regarding information processing is the
delivering the research questions as following:
information classification technique and the most used
Q1: What are the NLP models and techniques used for
algorithms include the long-short term memory and
analyzing FS components in the time span of 2018-2023?
bidirectional encoder models. The research noticed that
Q2: What are the challenges and limitations in the
new specific algorithms are developed and the focus of the
applications of NLP to the FS regarding text-mining
financial system is mainly on asset pricing component. The
applications on the engineering perspective of data
research also proposes a path from engineering perspective
processing?
for researchers who need to analyze financial text. The
challenges regarding text mining perspective such as data
2. THE APPLICATIONS OF NLP MODELS AND
quality, context-adaption and model interpretability need
TECHNIQUES IN FINANCIAL SYSTEM
to be solved so to integrate advanced natural language
Going deeper into example cases, we discover an
processing models and techniques in enhancing financial
ongoing trend that is growing fast. To analyze the subject-
analysis and prediction.
matter we go through a time span of 2018-2023.
Keywords: Financial System (FS), Natural Language
2.1. Materials and Methods
Processing (NLP), Software and Text Engineering,
The path used to answer to Q1 is built on the
Probabilistic, Vector-Space, Models, Techniques, Text-
methodology of filtering in the Google Scholar search
Data, Financial Analysis.
engine. There are included citations and patents with the
1. INTRODUCTION query as follows: (NLP OR “Natural Language
The financial sector is an important and a driving force Processing”) AND “*FS element mentioned in chapter
of the worldwide economic development and it is having a 1”AND text mining AND forecasting AND prediction
rapid development due to the use of the latest intelligent AND models. To give answer to our research questions we
technologies such as Natural Language Processing (NLP). explored around 250 scientific materials, from which 35 of
The period of 2018-2023 covered in this research paper them books and the rest papers and articles. After selecting
implies an important one, where NLPs have seen an the scientific materials filtered, we reached to a total of
exponential growth with the Large Language Models around one hundred and nine (109) papers, articles, books
(LLMs) projects like ChatGPTs, Gemini, Bard and Bing and similar. For the scope of this research paper, we
exploration and models deeper specifications. classified and analyzed around sixty (60) study materials.
Registered: 240529 Article Info: 1891 Accepted: 241118
Reserved: 240907 Available: 241231
1International Journal on “Technical and Physical Problems of Engineering” (IJTPE), Iss. 61, Vol. 16, No. 4, Dec. 2024
2.2. Results A textual analysis of China's financial markets is
Figure 1 shows that the focus of most studies relies on conducted with sentiment analysis [6]. The work of [30]
AP, (especially on stock prediction), while having the used transformers for sentiment analysis on
corporate finances as the second most studied component Environmental, Social, and Governance (ESG) news.
of FS. Datasets on the international finance FS component are of
various data sources, as they help to create an international
point of view on the topic.
30
As for the portfolio theory application of NLPs, we can
25
elaborate works that underpin the interconnection of the
20
fields of FS and NLP. An important work [7] applies
15
financial Bidirectional Encoder Representations from
10
Transformers (FinBERT), Monte Carlo, and Black and
5
Litterman model for portfolio optimization on Milano
0
Finanza data. Whereas, [28] investigated the importance of
financial sentiment in portfolio management using RF,
Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP), and LSTM on data from
Quandl and StockFluence APIs. Here we have to mention
even the use of datasets from other sectors for training
models, which can be sub-optimal, highlighting the need
No.of NLP scientific materials for more sector-specific annotated datasets [8,9,10]. The
diverse number of techniques used, show of a versatile
Figure 1. Histogram of scientific materials extracted and classified
sub-field, where data and information are not absent, but
according to Financial System Components for the years 2018-2023
needs more attention in the future, for taking proper
From the actual database of scientific materials, we financial decisions and predictions to the investors.
also noticed that most of NLP models were a combination The public finance component is elaborated in some
of probabilistic and vector-based ones. Whereas, regarding works below though, there is a need to be further
the classification on NLP techniques evidenced, we can investigated. Work of [11] applied machine learning to
refer to Figure 2. As we can see, the information budget speech statements. The article of [12] examined tax
classification techniques and the combination of the all compliance behavior using Bidirectional Encoder
three ones, has most of the works used during the time span Representations from Transformers (BERT) on survey
study. responses. A bank financial risk prediction model is
developed using big data from commercial banks,
40 employing Least Absolute Shrinkage and Selection
Operator (Lasso) and SVM [29]. The SVM techniques [13]
30
and hybrid deep learning models [14] show their global use
20 in different fields, we can mention the healthcare one.
Whereas the finance field is evolving, the need for
10 intelligent methods is rising, as it is a crucial point when
taking financial decisions, and is applied thoroughly in
0
Information Information Information Combination every other component presented above.
Retreaval Classification Extraction Through our work we saw that the stock predictions
No.of scientific materials according to information proccessing NLP remain the most studied topic, in the AP component of the
techniques FS, and that the AP component of the FS is the most
studied topic compared to other components. There might
Figure 2. Histogram of scientific materials extracted and classified
according to information processing NLP techniques, years 2018-2023, be different reasons, but what we can deduce is that there
are more open databases that allow the latter topic to be
We noticed a growing number of articles which studied and also, it is a very fast needed information. An
combined both probabilistic with VSM, and also combined investor has to have an accurate and timely information on
text-data with numerical ones. A systematic and critical stocks or in AP, in order to take proper decision. There is
review of deep learning in financial economics is provided evidenced a variety of datasets utilized, including financial
by using hybrid variants of methods [3]. The work [4] news databases. stock returns data, corporate financial
forecasted economic trends using sentiment analysis, reports (e.g., 10-K filings), and social media data (e.g.,
AutoRegressive with eXogenous inputs (ARX) and Lasso StockTwits, Weibo).
on data from articles from six newspapers showing varying The most used common specific techniques, as
levels of accuracy. The Numeric Hierarchical Transformer presented in Figure 3. include BERT types, Long Short-
Model (NumHTML) for financial forecasting using Term Memory (LSTM) and Logistic Regression (LR),
earning conference calls data was introduced in the year of whereas Lasso, Bag of Words (Bow), NEUS, K-Nearest
2022 [5]. As these studies remain near the financial Neighbors (KNN), Deep Neural Network (DNN), Deep
economics area, they also might have infusions of other Learning (DL), Generalized Autoregressive Conditional
topics, showing at least, a low interest on the matter. Heteroskedasticity (GARCH) and Autoregressive
2International Journal on “Technical and Physical Problems of Engineering” (IJTPE), Iss. 61, Vol. 16, No. 4, Dec. 2024
Integrated Moving Average (ARIMA) are to be of models to real-time data remain challenging,
mentioned. Other types of techniques, which are a particularly in evolving financial markets [24]. Even the
combination of above and new techniques proposed e.g. expert annotations based on prior beliefs can be incorrect,
NumHTML, AdaBoost, compose a share of 47 % in emphasizing need for context-based annotations [25]. The
overall scientific material of 60 papers used for the purpose infancy of text analysis in finance requires comprehensive
of this section. The frequently used evaluation parameters research to fully understand its potential [4].
were Accuracy, F1-score, Precision, Recall, and R2. Additionally, the use of datasets from other sectors for
training models can be sub-optimal, highlighting the need
for more sector-specific annotated datasets [10]. Future
research should take into consideration market frictions
and transaction costs in trading strategies [26]. While some
[15] challenges are mentioned above, the other ones such
restriction to confidential data, need of club inter-domain
results, highly un-structured and redundant data, sarcasm
and vernacular language and the new ones we presented
above resonate a need to address them as quickly as
possible. Lastly, we can state that advanced NLP models
show promise but require further investigation to address
their current limitations and optimize their use in financial
Figure 3. Histogram of scientific materials extracted and classified
predictions [27].
according to specific NLP techniques, years 2018-2023, Source:
Authors
Table 1. Challenges and Limitations in the application of NLP to FS, the
3. DISCUSSION x symbol means that the problem persists and needs to be addressed
This research highlighted several limitations on the text Challenges and Limitations in the application of
Gupta, et al. This
engineering perspective in the application of NLP to FSs NLP to FSs regarding text mining engineering
[15] research
perspective
in order to answer to Q2. It leverages the past works’ [15]
restriction to confidential data x solved
limitations and challenges (restriction to confidential data,
absence of well-defined financial
absence of well-defined financial lexicon lists, lack of lexicon lists x x
dynamic texts analysis models, need of club inter-domain partially
x
results, highly un-structured and redundant data, sarcasm lack of dynamic texts analysis models resolved
need of club inter-domain results x x
and vernacular language) are not fully appointed yet. Let
highly un-structured and redundant data x x
us point out the evolution of the challenges from the time
sarcasm and vernacular language x x
of the study’s [15] analysis to the end of the year 2023. A data shift between training corpora
x
significant issue is the data shift between training corpora and real-world corpora
and real estate headlines, leading to poor performance in overfitting problems of traditional model x
limited interpretability of advanced models x
event extraction [16]. Traditional models like the Fama-
time-varying distributions x
French 5-factor model (FF5) face overfitting problems,
low signal-to-noise ratios x
highlighting superiority of newer models like Generalized fail to capture the financial context adequately
x
News-based Sentiment Analysis (GNUS) [17]. due to reliance on general lexicons
Whereas even the latter like deep learning models data quality and causality issues x
matter of scalability and adaptability of models
encounter challenges with Non-Independent and x
to real-time data
Identically Distributed (non-IID) samples, time-varying
incorrect expert annotations based on prior
distributions, and low signal-to-noise ratios, complicating beliefs x
stock return predictions such as in [18]. Refs. [17, 18]
indicate a partially addressed issue of Gupta, et al. [15] As per conclusion of this chapter, we propose a path to
challenges to the lack of dynamic text analysis models. be followed when having to do research on the finance
There is a limited interpretability of advanced models like field combined with NLP models and techniques of text
BERT and Word2Vec that restricts their application, mining. Figures 4 and 5 explain visually the steps as per
particularly when not trained on domain-specific texts [19, follows.
20]. The sentiment analysis models often fail to capture
After determining the where we will delve in while
financial context adequately due to reliance on general
following the Figure 4, we follow the text analyzing steps
lexicons [21], a challenge not yet solved since the research
mentioned in Jurafsky and Martin 2020 [2]. Figure 5
paper [15] reference on absence of well-defined financial
explains in detail the broader panorama of analyzing
lexicon lists.
financial text in the language context and the specific
Further, data quality and causality issues persist,
limitations encountered from our work in the research
making it difficult to establish reliable links between
papers analyzed. In the right side of each step, there are
sentiment indicators and outcomes [22]. The overreliance
mentioned the most encountered limitations. These
on numerical data in models overlooks qualitative factors
limitations should be taken into account when dealing with
like managerial experience, which could enhance
problems of the same field as this research paper handles.
predictions [23]. The matter of scalability and adaptability
3
%2
%01
%3 %2 %2 %2 %2 %5 %2
%01 %21
%3
%74International Journal on “Technical and Physical Problems of Engineering” (IJTPE), Iss. 61, Vol. 16, No. 4, Dec. 2024
Financial texts remain difficult to understand as they
have a specific domain language. The models and Lexical Analysis, Structure and Meaning of the words
limitations discussed in this research paper tend to make
easier the first stage of a research, the state of the art. After absence of well-defined financial lexicon lists, fail to capture the
financial context adequately due to reliance on general lexicons
choosing the FS component field, NLP model and
techniques, the language analysis and having into account
the proper limitations as expressed in Figure 5, the data
preparation should begin.
Syntactic Analysis,Ogranization of the words into sentences
Asset Pricing Information Classification, LSTM
•S&P, Bloomberg, Dow Jones etc. lack of dynamic texts analysis models
Corporate
Combination, Other
finance
•10-K and 10-Q reports, etc.
Semantic Analysis, Meaning of words and sentences
Derivatives Combination, Other limited interpretability of advanced models, time-varying
•Thomson Reuters etc. distributions, low signal-to-noise ratios
Risk
Combination, Other
Managment
•Industries annual reports etc. Discourse Analysis, Meaning of Sentences in Documents
data shift between training corpora and real-world corpora, need of
International club inter-domain results, highly un-structured and redundant data
Information Classification, Other
Finance
•News articles, International Banks data etc.
Portfolio Theory Information Classification, Other Pragmatic Analysis, Understanding/interpreting language in
•Wall Street, Dow Jones etc. context
sarcasm and vernacular language, incorrect expert annotations
Financial based on prior beliefs, matter of scalability and adaptability of
Economics Information Classification, Other models to real-time data, data quality and causality issues,
•World Bank, Yahoo Finance etc. overfitting problems of traditional model, restriction to
confidentialdata
Public Finance Information Retrieval, BERTs
•Budget speeches etc.
Return to the any previous stage, if the following is not
Figure 4. The first step is to determine the FS component to work on accomplished, otherwise go to the model results.
with and the NLP technique regarding information processing and
model algorithms. In the left side FS components, in the right side the
most used NLP techniques for each component. In the bottom the most
Figure 5. Second step is to determine the problem on language terms
probable data source. “Other” and “Combination” have the same
and in which phase of language analysis it will go on to. For each
meaning as mentioned in Figures 1 and 2. In this Figure there are
double headed sub diagram, there is the step analysis on top and
mentioned the most used NLP techniques and models
limitations in the bottom. Source: Martin and Jura sky (2020) with the
limitations from the authors
4. CONCLUSIONS
Despite the limitations, NLP holds substantial promise for
Advancements in transfer learning and domain
enhancing the FS. Their mixed applications can
adaptation are promising for addressing data shift issues,
significantly improve the accuracy of predictions, such as
thereby improving model robustness and generalization.
stock prices and asset returns, by taking large amounts of
As the field progresses, developing more interpretable AI
textual data from news articles, social media, and financial
models will enhance transparency and trust, making NLP
reports. Advanced models like BERT and LSTM, and their
an indispensable tool for financial analysts and
modified models, have demonstrated superior
researchers.
performance in capturing the nuances of financial
The FS components of AP and corporate finance
language and predicting market movements. Integrating
remain amongst most elaborated with NLP techniques,
deep learning techniques into financial models not only
while the other components have a small number of
enhances prediction accuracy but also helps uncover
studies. Amongst NLP models, the most used remain the
underlying economic mechanisms, offering deeper
probabilistic and VSM models, whereas the most used
empirical insights into AP. Furthermore, NLP can
techniques remain the information classification and
facilitate better sentiment analysis, crucial for gauging
hybrid techniques. Overall, while advanced NLP and deep
market sentiment and making informed investment
learning models show great promise for financial
decisions.
4International Journal on “Technical and Physical Problems of Engineering” (IJTPE), Iss. 61, Vol. 16, No. 4, Dec. 2024
applications, ongoing research must address these Data (Big Data), pp. 3274-3283, Orlando, FL, USA,
limitations to enhance their accuracy, interpretability, and December 2021.
applicability. Future research should focus on refining [12] I. Florina, C. Stefana, C. Codruta, “Is Trust a Valid
models to account for local market dynamics, improving Indicator of Tax Compliance Behavior? A Study on
data quality and annotation methods, and developing more Taxpayers’ Public Perception Using Sentiment Analysis
sophisticated algorithms capable of handling the complex Tools”, A.M. Dima, M. Kelemen, (Eds.), “Digitalization
and dynamic nature of financial data. and Big Data for Resilience and Economic Intelligence”,
Springer Proceedings in Business and Economics.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS Springer, Cham, Switzerland, 2022.
The author(s) appreciate the assistance of the finance [13] V. Jain, B. Jha, S. Joshi, S. Miglani, A. Singal, S.
student Savina Shtaka for supporting in material search. Babbar, M. Demirci, M.C. Taplamacioglu, “Human
Disease Detection Using Artificial Intelligence”,
REFERENCES International Journal on Technical and Physical Problems
[1] T. Hens, M.O. Rieger, “Financial Economics”, of Engineering (IJTPE), Issue 55, Vol. 15, No. 2, pp. 125-
Springer Texts in Business and Economics, Springer 133, June 2023.
Berlin Heidelberg, pp. 5-6, Heidelberg, Berlin, Germany, [14] H.S. Rahli, N. Benamrane, “Intelligent Breast Cancer
2016. Screening Based on Deep Neural Networks”, International
[2] J. Martin, D. Jurafsky, “Speech and Language Journal on Technical and Physical Problems of
Processing an Introduction to Natural Language Engineering (IJTPE), Issue 57, Vol. 15, No. 4, pp. 404-
Processing”, Computational Linguistics, and Speech 409, December 2023.
Recognition, 3rd ed., pp. 3-263, 2020. [15] A. Gupta, V. Dengre, H.A. Kheruwala, M. Shah,
[3] Y. Zheng, Z. Xu, A. Xiao, “Deep Learning in “Comprehensive Review of Text-Mining Applications in
Economics: A Systematic and Critical Review”, Arif. Finance”, Financ Innov, Vol. 6, p. 39, December 2020.
Intell. Rev., Vol. 56, pp. 9497-9539, September 2023. [16] J. Huang, R. Xing, Q. Li, “Asset Pricing Via Deep
[4] L. Barbaglia, S. Consoli, S. Manzan, “Forecasting with Graph Learning to Incorporate Heterogeneous Predictors”,
Economic News”, Journal of Business and Economic Int J. of Intelligent Sys., Vol. 37, pp. 8462-8489,
Statistics, Vol. 41, pp. 708-719, July 2023. November 2022.
[5] L. Yang, J. Li, R. Dong, Y. Zhang, B. Smyth, [17] L. Zhu, H. Wu, M.T. Wells, “A News-Based Machine
“NumHTML: NumericOriented Hierarchical Transformer Learning Model for Adaptive Asset Pricing”, Arxiv
Model for Multi-Task Financial Forecasting”, AAAI, Vol. Preprint Arxiv:2106.07103, 2021.
36, pp. 11604-11612, June 2022. [18] C. Zhang, “Asset Pricing and Deep Learning”,
[6] A. Huang, W. Wu, T. Yu, “Textual Analysis for arXiv:2209.12014, Vol. 24, [q-fin.ST], September 2022.
China’s Financial Markets: a Review and [19] R. Liu, F. Mai, Z. Shan, Y. Wu, “Predicting
Discussion”, China Finance Review International, Vol. 10, Shareholder Litigation on Insider Trading from Financial
No. 1, pp. 1-15, 2020. Text: An Interpretable Deep Learning Approach”,
[7] F. Colasanto, L. Grilli, D. Santoro, G. Villani, “BERT’s Information and Management, Vol. 57, p. 103387,
Sentiment Score for Portfolio Optimization: A Fine-Tuned December 2020.
View in Black and Litterman Model”, Neural Comput. and [20] S. Gholizadeh, N. Zhou, “Model Explainability in
Applic., Vol. 34, pp. 17507-17521, October 2022. Deep Learning Based Natural Language Processing”,
[8] M. Wujec, “Analysis of the Financial Information arXiv:2106.07410 [cs], June 2021.
Contained in the Texts of Current Reports: A Deep [21] L. Malandri, F.Z. Xing, C. Orsenigo, C. Vercellis, E.
Learning Approach”, JRFM, Vol. 14, p. 582, December Cambria, “Public Mood-Driven Asset Allocation: The
2021. Importance of Financial Sentiment in Portfolio
[9] C. Chen, S. Xiao, B. Zhao, “Machine Learning Meets Management”, Cong Compute, Vol. 10, pp. 1167-1176,
the Journal of Public Budgeting and Finance: Topics and December 2018.
Trends Over 40 Years”, Public Budgeting and Finance, [22] C.K. Soo, “Quantifying Sentiment with News Media
Vol. 43, pp. 3-23, December 2023. Across Local Housing Markets”, The Review of Financial
[10] T.I. Theodorou, A. Zamichos, M. Skoumperdis, A. Studies, Vol. 31, pp. 3689-3719, October 2018.
Kougioumtzidou, K. Tsolaki, D. Papadopoulos, T. Patsios, [23] S.B. Jabeur, C. Gharib, S. Mefteh Wali, W.B. Arfi,
G. Papanikolaou, A. Konstantinidis, A. Drosou, D. “CatBoost Model and Artificial Intelligence Techniques
Tzovaras, “An AI-Enabled Stock Prediction Platform for Corporate Failure Prediction”, Technological
Combining News and Social Sensing with Financial Forecasting and Social Change, Vol. 166, pp. 120-658,
Statements”, Future Internet, Vol. 13, p. 138, May 2021. May 2021.
[11] C. Vuppalapati, A. Ilapakurti, S. Vissapragada, V. [24] J.Z.G. Hiew, X. Huang, H. Mou, D. Li, Q. Wu, Y. Xu,
Mamaidi, S. Kedari, R. Vuppalapati, S. Kedari, J. “BERT-Based Financial Sentiment Index and LSTM-
Vuppalapati, “Application of Machine Learning and Based Stock Return Predictability”, Arxiv:1906.09024 [q-
Government Finance Statistics for Macroeconomic Signal fin.ST], July 2022.
Mining to Analyze Recessionary Trends and Score Policy [25] M. Sedinkina, N. Breitkopf, H. Schutze, “Automatic
Effectiveness”, IEEE International Conference on Big Domain Adaptation Outperforms Manual Domain
Adaptation for Predicting Financial Outcomes”, The 57th
5International Journal on “Technical and Physical Problems of Engineering” (IJTPE), Iss. 61, Vol. 16, No. 4, Dec. 2024
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Research Interests: Natural Language Processing in
Linguistics, pp. 346-359, 2019. Finance and Media
[26] B. Fazlija, P. Harder, “Using Financial News Scientific Publications: 8 Papers, 2 Projects
Sentiment for Stock Price Direction Prediction”, Scientific Memberships: UNINOVIS Alumni
Mathematics, Vol. 10, pp. 21-56, June 2022.
[27] A. Zaremba, E. Demir, “ChatGPT: Unlocking the Name: Blerina
Future of NLP in Finance”, SSRN Journal, Modern Surname: Vika
Finance, 2023, Vol. 1, No. 1, pp. 93-98, 2023. Birthday: 27.06.1984
[28] L. Malandri, F.Z. Xing, C. Orsenigo, C. Vercellis, E. Birthplace: Tirana, Albania
Cambria, “Public Mood–Driven Asset Allocation: The Education: Informatics, Department of
Importance of Financial Sentiment in Portfolio Informatics, Faculty of Natural Sciences,
Management”, Cong Compute, Vol. 10, pp. 1167-1176, University of Tirana, Tirana, Albania,
December 2018. 2007
[29] H. Peng, Y. Lin, M. Wu, “Bank Financial Risk Master: Advanced Informatics, Department of
Prediction Model Based on Big Data”, Scientific Informatics, Faculty of Natural Sciences, University of
Programming, Vol. 20, No. 22, pp. 1-9, February 2022. Tirana, Tirana, Albania, 2011
[30] B. Sandwidi, S. Pallitharammal Mukkolakal, Doctorate: Information Systems, Department of Statistics
“Transformers-Based Approach for a Sustainability Term- and Applied Informatics, Faculty of Natural Sciences,
Based Sentiment Analysis (STBSA)”, The Second University of Tirana, Tirana, Albania, 2010
Workshop on NLP for Positive Impact (NLP4PI), (Abu The Last Scientific Position: Assoc. Prof., Department of
Dhabi, United Arab Emirates (Hybrid)), pp. 157-170, Statistics and Applied Informatics, Faculty of Economy,
Association for Computational Linguistics, 2022. University of Tirana, Tirana, Albania, 2024
Research Interests: Artificial Intelligences Machine
BIOGRAPHIES Learning, Forecasting Models
Scientific Publications: 20 Papers, 2 Books, 4 Projects
Name: Denisa
Surname: Millo Name: Nevila
Birthday: 19.11.1990 Surname: Baci
Birthplace: Elbasan, Albania Birthday: 15.05.1965
Bachelor: Business Informatics, Birthplace: Tirana, Albania
Department of Statistics and Applied Bachelor: Economics, Department of
Informatics, Faculty of Economy, Economics, Faculty of Economy,
University of Tirana, Tirana, Albania, 2012 University of Tirana, Tirana, Albania,
Master: Operational Research in Management, 1987
Department of Statistics and Applied Informatics, Faculty Doctorate: E-government, Faculty of Economy,
of Economy, University of Tirana, Tirana, Albania, 2014 University of Tirana, Tirana, Albania, 2005
Doctorate: Student, Information Systems in Economy, The Last Scientific Position: Prof., Department of
Department of Statistics and Applied Informatics, Faculty Statistics and Applied Informatics, Faculty of Economy,
of Economy, University of Tirana, Tirana, Albania, Since University of Tirana, Tirana, Albania, 2022
2022 Research Interests: Informatics, Information Systems, E-
The Last Scientific Position: Lecturer, Department of Commerce
Statistics and Applied Informatics, Faculty of Economy, Scientific Publications: 25 Papers, 1 Books, 5 Projects
University of Tirana, Tirana, Albania, Since 2016 Scientific Memberships: Academy of Science, Albania
6