Institute for National Security Studies
Report Part Title: Fields of Artificial Intelligence
Report Title: Artificial Intelligence and National Security in Israel
Report Author(s): Liran Antebi
Published by: Institute for National Security Studies (2021)
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/resrep30590.8
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide
range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and
facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at
https://about.jstor.org/terms
Institute for National Security Studies is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and
extend access to this content.
This content downloaded from 36.255.16.56 on Sat, 04 Jan 2025 16:52:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/termsChapter Two:
Fields of Artificial Intelligence
AI includes many perceptual-technological areas, including machine
learning, deep learning, computerized vision, natural language processing,
and a number of ancillary interconnected fields. This chapter focuses on the
different subdomains of AI.
Figure 4: AI and its subdomains
X
2
Mathematics Computer Artificial Machine Deep learning
science intelligence learning neural networks
Artificial Intelligence and National Security in Israel | Liran Antebi 41
This content downloaded from 36.255.16.56 on Sat, 04 Jan 2025 16:52:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/termsI
42 Artifiiia IttaaiitIit iIn itiiIia ticritt iI Irita
Machine Learning
The most common subdomain of AI is machine learning.25 Machine
learning allows algorithms to learn from information and develop solutions
independently,26 by using statistics-based algorithms that “learn” from large
databases to recreate human cognitive abilities and thus perform tasks in
unfamiliar situations.27 Machine learning allows algorithms to learn through
repetitive training and to create results that improve according to the scope of
training and the experience of the algorithm. This is different than software
written by a human programmer. One example is an AI program that receives
a database of the handwritten alphabet and learns to distinguish between
the handwritten letters, even if a person’s handwriting does not appear in
the existing repository.
There are several approaches to machine learning, among them supervised
learning, in which the programmer bases the learning on an existing initial
model, which the machine improves; and unsupervised learning, in which
the learning systems develop their own model, which does not depend on an
existing model.28 Another approach is reinforcement learning, in which the
software learns from trial and error, rather than from an existing repository
of information.
Deep Learning
Deep learning is a subset of machine learning, which uses artificial neural
networks. These are algorithms that are inspired by the behavior of the neural
network in the human brain.29 The neural network learns by making small
corrections by examining a large amount of data to improve its accuracy.30
Thus, the output of one neuron is the input of another neuron. Deep learning
acquired its name because it is based on many layers of artificial neurons.31
Due to their notable successes, neural networks have become the most
common approaches to machine learning and are responsible for a variety
of achievements in the field of AI, including facial recognition on a level
higher than that of the human ability to identify faces; identification of
objects in pictures; control of autonomous vehicles and drones; speech
transcription at a level that exceeds that of a professional human transcriber;
and language translation, including those languages in which the technology
was not trained.32
This content downloaded from 36.255.16.56 on Sat, 04 Jan 2025 16:52:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/termsI
FitanI if Artifiiia IttaaiitIit 43
Figure 5. Activity of a simple neural network in a n
application of identifying a photograph
The Black Box – The concealed stage
Examining the information
1
Input Output
2
3
A photograph
4
taken apart F-15 98%
into pixels Mig-29 50%
Bird 10%
Creating the characteristics and Superman 2%
the connections between them
1. A double tail was studied.
2. A wingspan greater than 10 meters was studied.
3. Twin engines were studied.
4. Two seaters were learned.
These central approaches have capabilities in the following various fields:
Image processing. Image-processing capability uses deep learning and
enables software to recognize objects within a picture and to categorize
them.33 The software divides the image into pixels and attaches values to
each pixel according to its color. This image analysis passes through the
deep system of artificial neuron networks of the software, which is trained
upon a large database of images and categorizes the image accordingly.
Today, some technologies in this field are already accessible to the public
as an off-the-shelf product, such as Google AI Vision software.34
Computer vision. Computer vision differs from image-processing
technologies in that it enables the software to identify objects in real time
and respond to them similar to the ability of human vision but without
the need to categorize them. These technologies are used in autonomous
This content downloaded from 36.255.16.56 on Sat, 04 Jan 2025 16:52:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/termsI
44 Artifiiia IttaaiitIit iIn itiiIia ticritt iI Irita
cars, for example, because they can identify a person who suddenly runs
into the road and warn the driver.35 Computer vision has also enabled 3-D
visualization, bone mass measuring, autonomous navigation, and control
of irregular transactions.
Natural language processing. Natural language processing (NLP) is
a subdomain of machine learning that enables the software to transcribe,
translate, and perform actions according to the broad meanings of a spoken
and written language and to produce new words and sentences that are
meaningful to a person.36 Among the natural language processing applications
are natural language generation (NLG), which helps process large amounts of
information and produce simple, easy-to-understand narratives and insights,
and natural language understanding (NLU), which aids in processing texts
whose information is missing or unstructured.37 A wide range of AI applications
now use NLP technology, including personal assistant applications such as Siri,
Echo, and Google Assistant, language translation applications, government
and business applications that analyze large text-based databases, and even
security applications in the field of military intelligence.38
A related technology, influenced by AI and its development, is the Internet
of Things. The Internet of Things (IoT) describes a world in which computers
and tiny sensors are embedded into various objects. These objects can produce
and store digital information, while they monitor their environment, present
information, and perform operations at a certain autonomous—or at least
automatic—level. These objects also connect to the internet, allowing them
to communicate with the environment, other devices, and people.39 Because
AI technology also relies on the existence of mass data that enables it to
make conclusions, the IoT technology has a key part in promoting AI.40 In
addition, integrating this technology into real-time AI applications allows
AI system to receive input on real-time reality and to regularly improve
its response. This technology, for example, enables the services of smart
cities, as was demonstrated in the Chinese city of Hangzhou.41 Similarly,
this technology has many security applications, including the Internet of
Battlefield Things (IoBT).
One of the characteristics of AI technology is that it has dual-use capability;
that is, the same application can be used for civilian, military, or security
purposes.42 This is not unique to AI and exists in other technologies and
scientific fields. The dual-use capability of AI is evident, for example, in
This content downloaded from 36.255.16.56 on Sat, 04 Jan 2025 16:52:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/termsI
FitanI if Artifiiia IttaaiitIit 45
software that can autonomously identify inappropriate objects in YouTube
videos and alert the user. This software can also identify weapons or suspicious
characters in security videos and produce alerts about them.43
This dual-use capability creates opportunities as well as challenges. It
enables the security industries to collaborate with the business sector and
develop technologies with a variety of applications that are useful for both
sectors. By means of minimal adjustments, technology developed for the
business sector can be used for combat purposes and can provide advanced
capabilities for hostile state or sub-state forces.44 This security challenge
is in addition to that of the various off-the-shelf products or technological
components, which with simple adjustments can easily become weapons
for those who cannot purchase them from the security industries.
The various kinds of AI applications, which have different capabilities
and are already embedded in many spheres, are summarized in table 1
below, based on findings of articles and studies from the years 2018–2019.
Database Video Natural Autonomous Computer vision Personalization
analysis processing Language capabilities and image of services
processing processing
₪
Table 1. Artificial intelligence: Areas of use
National
Security
Cyber
Banks and
finance
Transportation
Education
Communication
Labor and
manufacturing
Healthcare
This content downloaded from 36.255.16.56 on Sat, 04 Jan 2025 16:52:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/termsThis content downloaded from 36.255.16.56 on Sat, 04 Jan 2025 16:52:48 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms