2023 International Conference on Distributed Computing and Electrical Circuits and Electronics (ICDCECE)
Information Fusion for Seveirty Detection using
Machine Learning in Data Mining Healthcare
1st Vaishali Gupta 2nd Pawan Bhambu
Department of Computer Science & Engineering, Department of Computer Science Enginnering,
Chandigarh Engineering College, Vivekananda Global University,
Jhanjeri, India Jaipur, India
vaishali.j1631@cgc.ac.in pawan.bhambu@vgu.ac.in
Abstract—Improved patient care and less mental strain on contents, which leads to poor anti-interference capacity and
healthcare providers are two benefits of using algorithms for simple to generate mistakes. However, diagnostic procedures
machine learning to healthcare data. These algorithms may be may exhibit varying features, and analysis and use of such data
used to spot irregularities in vital signs, which might speed up may be hindered by a lack of coordination and complete
medical assistance or provide light on a disease's progression. analysis [2][3][4]. The present degree of information use is
While there is a wealth of literature comparing the unsupervised quite low. Experimental modal analysis may identify damage
and supervised performances of anomaly detection algorithms by observing shifts in a structure's inherent frequencies,
on popular public datasets, this same level of conceptual
damping ratios, and mode shapes (EMA). To pinpoint the
comparison is lacking when it comes to physiological data.
damage's origin and extent, it compares the observed modal
Knowing one's heart rate may provide valuable insight on one's
characteristics to either a baseline or fictional value and looks
health and level of physical activity, making it an underutilised
for deviations. However, erroneous conclusions may be
data source. Specifically, we used and compared five machine
reached as a result of processing such a big and complicated
learning methods, two of which were unsupervised and the other
data set. In a damage detection system inspired by the
three supervised, to identify outliers in heart rate data. The
Dempster-Shafer theory of evidence, a sort of multi-
algorithms were tested using physiological data from human
subjects' hearts. Results demonstrated that both outlier factor information fusion was used. When compared to more
and regression trees algorithms were effective in detecting heart traditional single-parameter approaches, the built-in
rate anomalies, with both models successfully generalising from parameter's sensitivity and reliability were both significantly
their simulation heart rate data training to real-world heart rate improved. The findings also demonstrated the broad
data. In addition, the findings lend credence to the idea that, in applicability of the multi-information fusion approach to
the absence of real labelled data, simulated data can be used to damage diagnosis. The rising incidence of fatal and seriously
configure methodologies to a certain degree of performance, injured traffic accidents is a major contributor to these tragic
indicating that this kind of training could be particularly useful outcomes. Having up-to-date information on incidents is
in the initial rollout of a system with no preexisting data. crucial. At the moment, systems designed to identify accidents
are either improving their detection accuracy or trying to make
Keywords— Information Fusion, Severity Detection, Machine
accidents more catastrophic. Knowing the specifics of an
Learning, and Data Mining Healthcare
event helps emergency medical services (EMS) provide the
I. INTRODUCTION
best care possible to those affected [5][6]. In order to properly
treat patient-specific pathology early on, longitudinal imaging
The safe and continuing functioning of electrical and
may record both fixed anatomical features and the dynamic
mechanical automation systems depends on accurate
changes that accompany illness development. However,
diagnosis of thermal defects in critical elements before they
longitudinal data is seldom used in traditional methods of
become severe. The overall management of thermal defects is diabetic retinopathy (DR) detection. Automatic depression
not optimal due to the inability of current algorithms to create
identification has come a long way in recent years, and a lot
consistent links among sensors. In order to regulate the built
of that progress may be attributed to modality fusing and deep
environment in a way that minimises energy consumption learning techniques. Multi-modal techniques, on the one hand,
while maximising efficiency, building’s fault detection and
add a great deal of complexity to the data collecting phase,
diagnosis (FDD) technology is required. When dealing with
while deep learning methods, on the other, are notoriously
complicated systems and unpredictable inputs, recent data-
mysterious, which undermines their trust. In this study, we
driven approaches have shown to be advantageous. Existing
present a multi-task BLSTM model that can process text using
studies on data-driven FDD, however, treat the issue as
pretrained word embeddings. With a state-of-the-art F1 score
nothing more than a classification challenge to label fault
of 0.87, our technique outperforms prior multi-modal research
kinds. For a long time, prior information on system setup and
and provides data for the existence of depression as well as a
problem severity levels was disregarded. When a transformer
projected severity score [7]. Moreover, we get the best RMSE
fails while it is operating, there are a variety of causes and
among all existing text-based methods. Finally, we use a per-
corresponding warning indicators. Diagnosing a problem
time-step attention mechanism to analyse the statements that
entail looking at the data, determining how serious the
contributed most to forecasting the sad state. Words like "um"
problem is, and ultimately pinpointing where in the system the
and "uh" and other paralinguistic information are really strong
problem lies [1]. Today, more and more data reflecting real-
predictors of sadness in our approach. For the first time, the
time condition information of transformer and an increasing
fact that conversational fillers may notify a deep-learning
number of information sources are accessible thanks to the
model to the possibility of depression has been exposed.
implementation of novel detection techniques including on-
Purpose Improve diabetic retinopathy symptom awareness
line surveillance and live detecting of transformers. However,
and disease severity categorization from fundus pictures using
on just one hand, diagnostic procedures are defined by a single
a hybrid architecture (DR) [8]. Techniques For this study, we
kind of characteristic data, such as ratio of gas pressure or
utilised 26,699 fundus pictures of 17,834 people with diabetes
979-8-3503-4745-6/23/$31.00 ©2023 IEEE
23315101.3202.66875ECECDCI/9011.01
:IOD
|
EEEI
3202©
00.13$/32/6-5474-3053-8-979
|
)ECECDCI(
scinortcelE
dna
stiucriC
lacirtcelE
dna
gnitupmoC
detubirtsiD
no
ecnerefnoC
lanoitanretnI
3202
Authorized licensed use limited to: VIT University. Downloaded on January 05,2025 at 05:15:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.from three hospitals in Taiwan, collected between 2007 and which is applied to signatures derived from external stray flux.
2018, to categorise DR severity. A total of 37 The belief function framework is used by this method to
ophthalmologists served as the actual truth for the pictures' describe and combine data collected from sensors located all
lesion diagnosis and severity rating. Two different fusion over the system in order to identify any potential short circuits.
architectures were proposed for deep learning: one that Researchers investigate how different sensor placements
combines lesion detection and categorization models around a machine affect their ability to spot problems. The
sequentially to mimic the choice process of ophthalmologists data collected from the machine's ambient magnetic field is
(late fusion) and another that merges lesion and intensity fused with other sources to create a novel diagnostic procedure
classification techniques in parallel (postprocessing fusion). with the benefit of being non-invasive. The diagnostic method
The efficiency of the architecture was tested using Messidor- relies on data collected by six external flow sensors mounted
2 and 1748 pictures. Classification accuracy, the weighted on a belt around the machine. These fingerprints are produced
statistic, and the area underneath the receiver operating by experiments with a rewound induction machine, which
characteristics curve were the major indicators of performance may generate varying degrees of inter-turn short circuit
(AUC). Results With an accuracy and weighted of 84.29% defects [12]. The purpose of this work is to investigate the
and 84.01%, correspondingly, for five-class DR grading, a identification and severity of thermal defects in electrical and
hybrid architecture performed well when used to hospital data. mechanical automation equipment. Before proposing an
This method also improved upon the accuracy of traditional MSIF method grounded on the D-S evidential theory, this
classification algorithms in identifying photos of early DR [9]. work investigated the heterogeneity Multi-Sensor Information
For referral DR detection, the Messidor-2 model scored an Fusion (MSIF) challenge presented by sensors located in
AUC of 97.09%, whereas state-of-the-art techniques trained crucial areas of electrical and mechanical automation
on a bigger database produced AUCs of 85% to 99%. equipment. The impact of thermal problems on the various
Conclusions In order to make our hybrid designs more durable equipment components was then assessed, with the report
and trustworthy for widespread use, we enhanced them by offering supporting evidence for the placement of sensors in
extracting features from DR pictures and boosting the strategic locations. Finally, testing findings demonstrated the
effectiveness of DR grading. Functional Relevance for efficiency of the proposed approach, and the thermal defect
Translation The suggested fusion designs have the potential to detection results were reached [13]. Using hierarchical
provide for more rapid and accurate identification of several labelling, the authors of this research present a unique data-
DR disorders than is currently possible via manual clinical driven technique for fusing system structural knowledge and
practice alone [10]. describing severity levels inside a single learning framework.
We derive the Large Margin Information Fusion (LMIF)
II. RELATED WORK technique and create a streaming-data-specific online learning
Using machine learning models like Random Forest, system. The suggested approach is applied to the FDD of a 90-
Gradient Boosting, and Xtreme Multilayer Perceptron trained ton centrifugal water-cooled chiller, in accordance with
with patient data and deep learning models like DenseNet201 ASHRAE Research Project 1043 (RP-1043). The benefits of
and InceptionResNetV2 received training with knee x-ray merging past knowledge of fault dependency data into the
images, this study aims to enhance the identification of Knee learning process are supported by experimental data showing
Osteoarthritis at all levels based on the Kellgren-Lawrence that LMIF can significantly enhance the FDD performance
scale. The cumulative predictive power of these models is and detect the faulty risk level with high accuracy [14]. So as
used as the basis for the final classification decision, which is to increase the accuracy of a diagnostic, this study presents the
made via a late fusion technique. Both machine learning and information energy technology and proposes a new criterion
deep learning models obtained superior performance as that should be efficiently integrated and logically stratified
measured by Precision, Recall, and F1-score, however the [15].
ROC curves for deep learning models revealed a greater level
of efficiency. In addition, the primary characteristics that drive
III. PROPOSED WORK
the illness were found using patient data in models of machine Several different techniques exist for accurately
learning [11]. To identify inter revolution short circuits in classifying and predicting medical conditions. Data mining for
inductors, this work introduces an approach based on fusion, medical practise faces a number of obstacles and problems.
Authorized licensed use limited to: VIT University. Downloaded on January 05,2025 at 05:15:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.Train the patients Numerical Inputs
records using SVM To remove duplicate and
missing values using pre-
processing techniques
Data Preprocessing
SVM ARL
Final Features
Categorical Imputation Label Encoding
Feature
Selection
using Boruta
Collect Patient
Health Records Patient Database
gniknaR
/
ecnatropmI
serutaeF
eht
Feature Number
Fig. 1. Suggested work flow
A. Data Pre-processing (cid:11) X
(cid:12) (cid:13)
⎡ ⎤ ⎡ ⎤
Date, Numeric data, and String, types are represented in ⎢(cid:11) (cid:13)⎥ ⎢X (cid:14)⎥
the dataset's columns. In addition to continuous variables, our C= ⎢(cid:11) (cid:14)⎥, X= ⎢X (cid:22)⎥ (2)
dataset also contains categorical ones. The categorical ⎢⋯⎥ ⎢⋯⎥
variables were label-encoded since the ML model expects all ⎣(cid:11) (cid:16)⎦ ⎣X (cid:16)⎦
input data to be in numerical form. This procedure gives a
numeric value to each distinct column category. There are a where (cid:11) projected weights, or regression estimators, for the
(cid:23)
number of blanks in the data set that, when used as input, will characteristics of interest in the data, and (cid:11) symbolises the
(cid:12)
result in a failure. Thus, we use "NA" to represent missing point when an equation begins to slope down.
data. The "death" and "recov" columns of certain patient
collected data are both blank; these records were extracted (cid:5)(cid:24)(cid:7)=(cid:25)=(cid:11) (cid:12)+(cid:11) (cid:13)x (cid:13)+(cid:11) (cid:14)x (cid:14)+⋯+(cid:11) (cid:16)x (cid:16) (3)
from the occupy a central place and added to the testing
Our study's logistic regression technique uses a total of 25
dataset, while the remainder records were added to the train
features from the dataset, therefore it is based on the dataset's
dataset. Date-formatted columns also exist in the dataset.
characteristics.
Instead of directly using the data columns, model. this model
has been employed. The relevant (hosp vis—sym on) value h(cid:5)x(cid:7)=(cid:5)(cid:11) +(cid:11) x +(cid:11) x +⋯+(cid:11) x (cid:7) (4)
has been entered into a new column. From this, we may (cid:12) (cid:13) (cid:13) (cid:14) (cid:14) (cid:16) (cid:16)
calculate how long it was until the patient went to the hospital
If the value of is less than or equal to, the model will
after first experiencing symptoms.
classify the record as a survivor or a fatality
B. Machine Learning Classifiers
(5)
(cid:11) +(cid:11) x +(cid:11) x +⋯+(cid:11) x ≥0
(cid:12) (cid:13) (cid:13) (cid:14) (cid:14) (cid:16) (cid:16)
Logistic Regression. For binary and multiclass issues,
logistic regression is a popular statistical classification The maximum-likelihood ratio notion is used to find the
approach. Logistic functions are used to forecast the best possible regression estimator. The attribute-to-class label
likelihood of a class label. Hypothesis in its operational mapping is performed using a sigmoid function (logistic
version is function).
Y=C(cid:4)(cid:5)X(cid:7) (1) The following equations describe the sigmoid equation in
its functional form:
where C is a list of linear regression and X is a list of attributes.
Authorized licensed use limited to: VIT University. Downloaded on January 05,2025 at 05:15:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.(cid:13) mitigate the model's inherent bias. The XGB methodology is
S(cid:5)g(cid:7)=
(cid:5)(cid:13)!"#$(cid:7)
(6)
the result of adjusting a number of variables simultaneously.
(cid:13) Better model performance may be achieved by finding the
S(cid:5)g(cid:7)=
%(cid:13)!"#&’(cid:5)((cid:7)) sweet spot for parameter values. The grid search method was
used to find optimal values for the parameters.
where is a numeric constant Euler's number. To prevent
*
Rule extracting from such a learned SVM (SVM-Rule)
model overfitting, LR employs a regularisation parameter.
process is crucial for data mining as well as the discovery of
Hyperoptimized parameters for the logistic regression were
knowledge because to the SVM's high accuracy in regression
found using a grid search optimization.
and classification. Nevertheless, in fact, the rules derived
using SVM-Rule are less intelligible than we expected, due to
Moreover, feature selection may be accomplished with the
the presence of a large number of obscure numeric factors
help of a random forest. It divides the data into a training set
(i.e., support vectors) in those rules.
and a test set with the help of bootstrapping data sampling.
Every bootstrap uses a different set of trees that are generated While the decision tree's obtained rules might not be as
repeatedly by the model. The final forecast is calculated by precise as SVM rules, they are simple to understand because
averaging the votes from each category. It's the sum of all the each rule corresponds to a single decision path that can be
branches of the many decision trees. An example of a followed in the tree structure. Using the coordinates from
classification method that uses a hierarchical structure is the SVMs aggregate in the tree, as well as the tree structure as a
decision tree. information gain, gain ratio and Entropy the result of a decision tree rule, rule extracting using SVM trees
Gini-index are all used to determine which node should be the (SVMT-Rule) is able to do rule extract over a tree structure of
decision maker. Both data augmentation and entropy were SVM. The support vector rule maintains the excellent
used in our analysis, as shown by the following formula as: classification accuracy, while the decision-tree rule improves
the rule's understandability. And as the SVMT Rule
E(cid:5)Y(cid:7)=∑(cid:16) (cid:23).(cid:13) −p (cid:23)log (cid:14) p (cid:23) (7) aggregates groups of SVMs, it may conduct a very accurate
E(cid:5)X,Y(cid:7)=∑ P(cid:5)n(cid:7)E(cid:5)n(cid:7) classification on datasets with severe, even overpowering,
(cid:16)∈4
class-imbalanced data distribution.
where represents the entropy of the target, while
7(cid:5)(cid:25)(cid:7)
Entropy is the entropy of the attributes with the target, IV. RESULTS & DISCUSSION
(cid:5)X,Y(cid:7)
in which 8 =9x ,x ,…,x ; is the list of characteristics that Numpy, Pandas, SciPy, Scikit Learn, Matplotlib and
(cid:13) (cid:14) (cid:16)
describe the data. As a result, the attribute that yields the most Datetime, are some of the required packages and libraries for
useful data will be the "root" attribute: this endeavour. The project's execution has been placing on
Google Colab, using the CPU real-time. Google Colab has a
Information_Gain (8)
=7(cid:5)(cid:25)(cid:7)−7(cid:5)8,(cid:25)(cid:7) CPU with the following specifications: model 79, CPU
Family 6 (Intel Xeon), model name 79, 2.20 GHz (Cache:
It takes the predictions of many trees and mixes them using
56,320 KB), and model name 6 (CPU Family 6). Google
a set of random vectors denoted by _T. None of the vectors
Drive is being utilised for storage.
you choose will affect the vectors you chose before. The
resulting forest of trees may be represented as . The Common metrics including precision, sensitivity,
ℎ(cid:5)(cid:24)(cid:7)
following diagram illustrates the decision tree's tendency to specificity, accuracy, and the F-score were used to assess the
mistake in its overall conclusions: model's efficacy. The classifiers were compared using a
number of different metrics, including area under the curve
GE=P (cid:5)margin _fuc(cid:5)X,Y(cid:7)<0(cid:7) (9) and aspects involved characteristic (ROC). It is one of the
4,>
most used methods for evaluating the diagnostic test's
where quantifies how likely it is that a given sensitivity (response rate) and specificity (false-positive rate).
P
4,>
collection of characteristics corresponds to the Y category.
Accuracy (cid:4)H!(cid:4)I (10)
=
The XGB algorithm is a classification and regression (cid:4)H!(cid:4)I!JH!JI
method that uses an ensemble of models. The gradient
where proper classification of test data is a reflection of the
boosting technique in its regularised version. Unfortunately,
model's accuracy.
model overfitting occurs sometimes in the gradient boosting
approach owing to the asymmetry of the data. Although
overfitting is still possible, the XGB algorithm's regularisation Sensitivity TP (11)
=
parameter helps mitigate this. Comparable to randomized (cid:4)H!JI
forest, XGB is a tree-based ensemble learning method. The
Sensitivity measures how well a classification system can
goal of the boosting data resampling technique is to improve
anticipate positive labels. The positive predicted value (PPV)
the accuracy of the model by reducing the misclassification
or true positive rate (TPR) is another name for this statistic
error. It's an iterative method. In the following iteration, the
(PPV).
model was trained using the data that had previously been
used for unsuccessful predictions. The method will be
Specificity (cid:4)I (12)
repeated until the model reaches a state of optimality. =
(cid:4)I!JH
The regularisation parameter lowers the model's variance
The sensitivity of a classification system is measured by
by giving misclassified occurrences a larger share of the total
its ability to accurately forecast the frequency with which
weight. Addition of mass ameliorates model underfitting. To
negative class labels will be assigned.
prevent overfitting from causing a significant increase in the
misclassification rate, penalty regularisation was used to
Authorized licensed use limited to: VIT University. Downloaded on January 05,2025 at 05:15:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.score (cid:14)L precision L recall (13)
F− =
precision ! recall
F-score is the average of how well something was
remembered and how accurate it was. The performance was
given in fig 2 to fig 6 respectively and the table 1 gives the
performance analysis.
Fig. 5. F-score vs. Data Points
Fig. 2. Accuracy vs. Data Points
Fig. 6. AUC Curve vs. Data Points
Nevertheless, as we were particularly interested in
healthcare and the practical application of machine learning to
monitoring heart rate, we thought it was important to assess
Fig. 3. Precision vs. Data Points how well existing algorithms predicted anomalies for a real-
world data set of heart rates. To determine how often the
algorithms miss outliers and how much the preceding training
phase on simulated data affected anomaly identification
accuracy on actual heart rate data, we resorted to
visualisations. Prediction techniques with poor sensitivity will
not perform well in their main purpose (e.g., the detecting of
anomalies), and prediction models with low sensitivity will
result in an elevated false alarm rate, therefore it is crucial to
bear in mind the relevance of both while using these
algorithms. By keeping both of these systems performance
metrics at high levels when these anomaly - based models are
deployed in the real world, we can assure that both medical
professionals and patients can have faith in the system's
predictions.
TABLE I. EVALUATION ANALYSIS
Fig. 4. Recall vs. Data Points
Methods Accuracy Precision Recall F1 Score AUC
DT 0.78 0.81 0.74 0.77 0.76
RF 0.81 0.87 0.73 0.79 0.81
LR 0.65 0.64 0.71 0.67 0.65
SVM 0.78 0.84 0.69 0.76 0.80
SVM 0.84 0.86 0.81 0.83 0.84
ARL
Authorized licensed use limited to: VIT University. Downloaded on January 05,2025 at 05:15:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.V. CONCLUSION [6] Bocklet, T., Steidl, S., Nöth, E., & Skodda, S. (2013). Automatic
evaluation of parkinson's speech - acoustic, prosodic and voice related
A difficult but crucial endeavour is the automated cues. Interspeech.
identification of irregularities in physiological parameters, [7] Nallagonda, S., Godugu, K.K., & Ranjeeth, M. (2020). Energy-
such as monitoring of heart rates. The inherent Efficiency Analysis of Cognitive Radio Network with Improved
unpredictability of human physiological data does contribute Energy Detectors and SC Diversity over Nakagami-q Fading
Environment. 2020 IEEE International Symposium on Sustainable
to the challenge of anomaly detection in health data. Consider
Energy, Signal Processing and Cyber Security (iSSSC), 1-6.
the case of a person whose current heart rate is flagged as
[8] Ramesh, G. P., Aravind, C. V., Rajparthiban, R., & Soysa, N. (2014).
abnormal by an anomaly detection system but who, in fact, is Body area network through wireless technology. Int. J. Comput. Sci.
just starting a very strenuous exercise routine. This study Eng. Commun, 2(1), 129-134.
analyses the performance of five algorithms based on machine [9] Lu, P., Huo, C., Duan, W., Ai, J., Jin, H., & Jin, L. (2019). Information
Fusion and Image Processing Based Arc Detection and Localization in
learning in identifying abnormalities in heart rate data by
Pantograph-Catenary Systems. 2019 22th International Conference on
training them on two synthetic datasets. We used the MIT-
Information Fusion (FUSION), 1-8.
BIH database to get heart rate data from a single patient and [10] Saucedo-Dorantes, J.J., Zamudio-Ramírez, I., Cureño-Osornio, J.,
test five different models. Osornio-Rios, R.A., & Antonino-Daviu, J.A. (2021). Condition
Monitoring Method for the Detection of Fault Graduality in Outer Race
REFERENCES Bearing Based on Vibration-Current Fusion, Statistical Features and
Neural Network. Applied Sciences.
[1] Tseng, V.S., Chen, C., Liang, C., Tai, M., Liu, J., Wu, P.Y., Deng, M., [11] Abasolo, K.H. (2021). Detection of Knee Osteoarthritis Severity using
Lee, Y., Huang, T., & Chen, Y. (2020). Leveraging Multimodal Deep a Fusion of Machine and Deep Learning models.
Learning Architecture with Retina Lesion Information to Detect [12] Irhoumah, M., Mercier, D., Pusca, R., Lefevre, E., & Romary, R.
Diabetic Retinopathy. Translational Vision Science & Technology, 9. (2017). Information fusion of external flux sensors for detection of
[2] Gao, Y., Liang, Z., Wang, B., Wu, Y., & Wu, P. (2018). Wetland inter-turn short circuit faults in induction machines. IECON 2017 -
Change Detection Using Cross-Fused-Based and Normalized 43rd Annual Conference of the IEEE Industrial Electronics Society,
Difference Index Analysis on Multitemporal Landsat 8 OLI. J. Sensors, 8076-8081.
2018, 8130470:1-8130470:8. [13] Perveen, N., Singh, D., & Mohan, C. K. (2016, December).
[3] Cessna, J., Alonzo, M., Foster, A.C., & Cook, B.D. (2021). Mapping Spontaneous facial expression recognition: A part based approach. In
Boreal Forest Spruce Beetle Health Status at the Individual Crown 2016 15th IEEE International Conference on Machine Learning and
Scale Using Fused Spectral and Structural Data. Forests. Applications (ICMLA) (pp. 819-824). IEEE.
[4] Datla, R., Chalavadi, V., & Mohan, C. K. (2022, March). A framework [14] Li, D., Zhou, Y., Hu, G., & Spanos, C.J. (2016). Fusing system
to derive geospatial attributes for aircraft type recognition in large- configuration information for building cooling plant Fault Detection
scale remote sensing images. In Fourteenth International Conference and severity level identification. 2016 IEEE International Conference
on Machine Vision (ICMV 2021) (Vol. 12084, pp. 172-179). SPIE. on Automation Science and Engineering (CASE), 1319-1325.
[5] Dousa, A., & Mohamed, S.A. (2016). Data fusion of video camera and [15] Wang, X., Wang, S., & Zhu, W. (2019). Multilevel Information Fusion
Laser Range Finder (LRF) for obstacle avoidance. DGA Diagnosis Method for Power Transformer. 2019 IEEE 3rd
Information Technology, Networking, Electronic and Automation
Control Conference (ITNEC), 770-773.
Authorized licensed use limited to: VIT University. Downloaded on January 05,2025 at 05:15:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.