J. Internet Comput. Serv.
ISSN 1598-0170 (Print) / ISSN 2287-1136 (Online)
http://www.jics.or.kr
Copyright ⓒ 2024 KSII
Multi-dimensional Contextual Conditions-driven
Mutually Exclusive Learning for Explainable AI
☆
in Decision-Making
Hyun Jung Lee1*
ABSTRACT
There are various machine learning techniques such as Reinforcement Learning, Deep Learning, Neural Network Learning, and so
on. In recent, Large Language Models (LLMs) are popularly used for Generative AI based on Reinforcement Learning. It makes decisions
with the most optimal rewards through the fine tuning process in a particular situation. Unfortunately, LLMs can not provide any
explanation for how they reach the goal because the training is based on learning of black-box AI. Reinforcement Learning as
black-box AI is based on graph-evolving structure for deriving enhanced solution through adjustment by human feedback or reinforced
data. In this research, for mutually exclusive decision-making, Mutually Exclusive Learning (MEL) is proposed to provide explanations of
the chosen goals that are achieved by a decision on both ends with specified conditions. In MEL, decision-making process is based
on the tree-based structure that can provide processes of pruning branches that are used as explanations of how to achieve the
goals. The goal can be reached by trade-off among mutually exclusive alternatives according to the specific contextual conditions.
Therefore, the tree-based structure is adopted to provide feasible solutions with the explanations based on the pruning branches. The
sequence of pruning processes can be used to provide the explanations of the inferences and ways to reach the goals, as Explainable
AI (XAI). The learning process is based on the pruning branches according to the multi-dimensional contextual conditions. To deep-dive
the search, they are composed of time window to determine the temporal perspective, depth of phases for lookahead and decision
criteria to prune branches. The goal depends on the policy of the pruning branches, which can be dynamically changed by
configured situation with the specific multi-dimensional contextual conditions at a particular moment. The explanation is represented by
the chosen episode among the decision alternatives according to configured situations. In this research, MEL adopts the tree-based
learning model to provide explanation for the goal derived with specific conditions. Therefore, as an example of mutually exclusive
problems, employment process is proposed to demonstrate the decision-making process of how to reach the goal and explanation
by the pruning branches. Finally, further study is discussed to verify the effectiveness of MEL with experiments.
☞ keyword : Mutually Exclusive Learning, Multi-dimensional Contextual Conditions, Explainable AI (XAI),
Mutually Exclusive Decision-Making
1. Introduction a Large Language Model (LLM) with a transformer model in
natural language processing and unsupervised learning, which
operates by considering extensive contexts and analyzing
In recent years, global big-tech and high-tech companies
embedded content among words. To improve the accuracy of
such as Google, Meta, Apple, and NAVER have been
its outcomes, ChatGPT adopts Reinforcement Learning with
competitively developing and gradually releasing advanced
Human Feedback (RLHF) through fine-tuning and
Generative AI (Artificial Intelligence). As a leader in this
prompt-tuning based on human feedback [1]. The achieved
field, ChatGPT, a chatbot using conversational AI, was
outcomes can be reinforced by probabilistic facts, human
released by OpenAI in November 2022, leading to a surge
rewards, and other methods. In Generative AI, it is possible
in interest in Generative AI. ChatGPT is implemented using
to reach better and better goals beyond the currently given
optimized goals because the system improves through
1Dept. of Economic Research, Goyang City Institute, Goyang,
updates and adjustments via reinforcement-based fine-tuning.
10393, South Korea
* Corresponding author: hjlee5249@gmail.com Generative AIs work well to find solutions, but the
[Received 31 January 2024, Reviewed 20 February 2024(R2 14 accuracy of ChatGPT 4.0 is 85.5%, according to an
June 2024, R3 25 July 2024), Accepted 28 July 2024]
announcement by OpenAI [2]. In addition, they are still
☆ A preliminary version of this paper was presented at APIC-IST
2023. struggling with issues such as hallucinations, confirmation
Journal of Internet Computing and Services(JICS) 2024. Aug.: 25(4): 7-21 7
http://dx.doi.org/10.7472/jksii.2024.25.4.7Multi-dimensional Contextual Conditions-driven Mutually Exclusive Learning for Explainable AI in Decision-Making
bias, fake news, and various types of fraud [3]. It is related works and research motivation are reviewed. Section
necessary to provide explanations of the achieved solutions 3 addresses the learning structure and problem-solving
to determine their validity. However, it is not common to process of MEL. In Section 4, the feature and conceptual
provide explanation of how outputs are achieved in variables for MEL are defined. Section 5 illustrates the
Generative AIs, since the learning algorithms are based on scenario and verification of the proposed model. Finally,
black-box AI techniques such as Neural Networks (NN), section 6 presents the conclusions and suggests further
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN), and Deep Learning research related to MEL.
(DL) [4]. AlphaGo, for instance, is also trained using
black-box AI like CNN. The explainable path might not be 2. Literature Review
crucial because it is based on probabilistic models that
assume the existence of unchangeable optimal goals for
There are many machine learning algorithms such as NN,
given problems. In mutually exclusive decision-making
Reinforcement Learning (RL), Natural Language Processing
problems, it is important to show the paths to the goal as in
(NLP) that are applied to develop AI models such as
Explainable AI (XAI) because the goal might be achieved
ChatGPT, Bard, LLaMA, AlphaGo, and Adaptive AI. One
by choosing branch among alternatives according to various
of the most popular AI models is Generative AI, which is
conditions.
developed using LLM and NLP in text-based conversational
DARPA (Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency)
systems. It can generate tailored answers according to the
started the XAI program in 2015 [5], as a type of white-box
user’s prompts.
AI. Recently, interest in XAI has grown, and it has been
For the development of more flawless AI, ChatGPT
applied to critical problem-solving, especially in financial,
adopted RLHF, which can extract advanced outputs from
medical, and legal domains [6, 7]. For instance, XAI can be
rough drafts by fine-tuning based on human feedback. In
applied to diagnosing disease because it provides more
addition, ChatGPT 4.0 supports multi-modality for providing
reliable accuracy in diagnostic tests with interpretability [8,
advanced Generative AI. This is known as multi-modal AI,
9]. In addition, it is necessary to provide the explanations
which interacts with users through conversational systems
for the paths to reach goals like medical decisions for easier
using a variety of converged modalities such as visual data
acceptance. The goal can be achieved by trade-off among
(images, videos), audio (speech and sound), text, and other
mutually exclusive alternatives according to the specific
sensory inputs. As for other Generative AI, Google’s Bard
contextual conditions.
was released in march 2023. Bard is based on LaMDA
In this research, we focused on mutually exclusive
(Language Model for Dialogue Applications) using LLM
decision-making that requires explanations to show the path
and serves as an AI-based search engine service that
to the goals. To achieve this, we utilized a tree-based
supports online data surfing from the web. Meta also
structure to address the problems. The proposed tree-based
released LLaMA (Large Language Model Meta AI) in
decision-making process involves choosing and pruning
February 2023, which is developed for non-commercial use
branches based on multi-dimensional contextual conditions.
to assist expert studies, unlike ChatGPT, which is intended
The goal may dynamically change depending on the chosen
for public use. NAVER has released HyperCLOVA X,
contextual conditions and can be achieved at the expense of
which is specialized at Korean compared to other Generative
the pruned branches in the tree-based structure. The achieved AIs developed by global AI companies. It has a deep
goal includes explanations of which branches are selected at understanding of Korean culture and law, as exemplified in
each stage and why they chosen, considering the contextual the “NAVER knowledge iN” service. It also functions as a
variables. Therefore, the proposed Mutually Exclusive real-time search service based on a large amount of
Learning (MEL) is based on tree-based structure to provide knowledge storage. Additionally, Korean companies have
explanations for the uncertainty-aware problem. developed other models, such as Kakao’s KoGPT, SKT’s A.
This paper is organized as follows. In section 2, the and LG’s EXAONE. However, the learning process of these
8 2024. 8Multi-dimensional Contextual Conditions-driven Mutually Exclusive Learning for Explainable AI in Decision-Making
AI models is based on black-box AI, so they do not provide customization of its decision-making algorithms without
any explanations for the goals they reach. human feedback. This AI model employs self-evolving
In ChatGPT, as a representative black-box AI, the algorithms to interpret and integrate newly acquired data
learning process is composed of three step: preparing tasks, autonomously [10]. Adaptive AI has diverse applications,
developing reward model, and applying RL-based on including business problem-solving, fraud detection in
fine-tuning the LLM. First, preparing tasks involve training financial transactions, improving logistics operations, and
the model repeatedly using transformers with NLP and identifying patterns in patient symptoms. Its computational
Supervised Learning (SL) to generate answers for any given model is continuously self-evolving without human
prompt. Second, reward model is trained using RL-based on intervention, making it suitable for volatile and dynamic
human preferences. It is derived from the trained language environments.
model using a ranked data set built from human feedback to Despite their capabilities, the illustrated learnings still
evaluate the generated outputs from AI models. Finally, have limitations such as generating distorted outcomes due
RL-based fine-tuning of LLM involves processes to achieve to algorithmic bias, data bias, and system errors. These
more reliable outputs, such as defining the action space, limitations can perpetuate harmful stereotypes through the
observation space, and the reward function. Generating continuous supply of incomplete information, leading to
qualified outcomes for given prompt is crucial. The issues like hallucinations, fake news, and confirmation bias
observation space includes all possible input token sequences [3, 11]. There are ongoing discussions on addressing the
from the environment, while the RL algorithm operates on problem of hallucinations. AI-generated content that is not
all tokens in the model’s vocabulary within the action space. based on truthful sources highlights the need for caution in
The reward function combines the preference model and over-relying on AI-generated results. In Generative AI, it is
constraints for the AI-agent’s output. The reward predictor is challenging to determine the accuracy of outcomes due to
tuned by human feedback within the reward function. The the inexplicable nature of the learning process [5]. If the
RLHF process involves the RL algorithm, the environment results are related to mutually exclusive decision-making
and the reward predictor [2]. problems such as employment processes, medical decisions,
AlphaGo, another type of black-box AI, was developed wastewater discharge status, and business problems requiring
for the game of Go. To reach the goal, it is necessary to choices, then they become difficult to utilize the derived
reduce the search space from the enormous number of outcomes without any explanations from black-box AI [2].
possible cases. Effective prediction of board positions and Recent AI research has focused on explaining achieved
moves is crucial [4]. To achieve this, AlphaGo adopted a results and correcting inaccurate and unreliable outcomes.
combination of Deep Neural Networks (DNN) and There is an increasing number of studies on Explainable
tree-based search engine, integrating Monte-Carlo Tree Artificial Intelligence (XAI) programs [5, 11, 12], also
Search (MCTS) with policy and value networks [4]. The known as white-box AI. Conversely, since black-box AI
DNN is trained using a novel combination of SL from models do not provide any explanations, various issues arise
human expert games and RL from games of self-play [4]. from generated fake news, confirmation bias, and
Tree-based MCTS engine is applied to reduce the search hallucinations [3]. Consequently, the demand for developing
space through selected actions by lookahead search. Policy XAI has increased [5], particularly in fields related to critical
networks are developed for selection move positions, and decision-making problems such as medicine, finance,
value networks are used to evaluate board positions. The transportation, security, legal, military [5, 13, 14, 15].
DNN is developed using a combination of SL and RL. SL Providing explanations for the decision-making process is
is used to train the predictions of human expert moves in essential to achieve these goals.
policy networks, while RL is used to improve the SL DARPA spent four years on the research progress of the
positions by self-play positions in value networks [4]. XAI program from 2017 to 2021 [5]. Numerous technical
Adaptive AI, a recent advancement, focuses on dynamic approaches have been developed as part of DARPA's XAI
한국 인터넷 정보학회(25권4호) 9Multi-dimensional Contextual Conditions-driven Mutually Exclusive Learning for Explainable AI in Decision-Making
program, focusing on extracting explanations from black-box exclusive decision. The proposed MEL (Mutually Exclusive
AI models like deep learning or hybrid deep learning Learning) is based on tree-based structure, which is applied
approaches [5]. Ultimately, the explanations would be to prune branches according to contextual conditions at a
provided to users who need to understand and interact with moment.
the decision-making process [5]. Furthermore, there is
ongoing R&D on XAI in various organizations, such as
Google, IBM, Watson’s openspace, Kyndi (Cognitive search
platform) [16], AITRICS, and more.
As discussed, ChatGPT is applied to find incrementally
reinforced solutions with human feedback at a particular
moment. AlphaGo is based on tree-based rigid
problem-solving to find the optimal solutions. Adaptive AI
is suitable for business problems, acting as a dynamic
decision-making tool using self-evolving algorithms with
data. These AI models are based on black-box AI.
Therefore, there are limitations in providing explanations for
how they reach their goals, even through DARPA is
working on developing XAI.
Specifically, this research focuses on providing
explanations for the achieved goals in mutually exclusive
decision-making. Tree-based MEL consists of the processes
(Figure 1) Graph-based Structure vs. Tree-based
to reach the goal by pruning branches as alternatives and
Structure in AI Learning
providing explanations with the pruning history while
considering various conditions.
3.1.1 based evolving AI learning
3. Mutually Exclusive Learning In Generative AI, the learning process is based on the
graph structure to drive incrementally reinforced solutions.
So, it is possible for the currently given solutions to be
3.1 Tree-based rigid learning vs.
improved through interaction of training models, reward
Graph-based evolving learning
programs, etc. The graph-based problem solving process has
Solved problems by AI learning might be roughly a evolving architecture. For instance, adaptive AI supports
classified into graph-based structure and tree-based structure dynamic refinements with fluid data of decision-makings
as in Figure 1. As black-box AI, reinforcement-driven through the changes in real-world environments. In the
decision-making has a graph-based evolving structure problems with graph-based evolving structure, it is possible
because it involves solving problems to extract enhanced to customize result and maximize reward at a particular
solutions. The learning of AlphaGo is based on planning that situation.
uses a high-performance tree-based search engine, such as As in Figure 2, in graph-based evolving AI learning,
MCTS, conjunction with policy and value networks. In the there are various paths to reach the goal between input as
problem, it is clear that there are optimal solutions under the prompt node and the output as the answer node. In the
considerable conditions, even though it needs tremendous learning process, it is not important which path is chosen to
effort to find the optimal moves in the game of Go. reach the goal but rather which better goal is chosen.
As shown in Figure 1, the decision-making process is Therefore, it does not focus on explaining how the goal was
classified into two types: reinforced decision and mutually reached.
10 2024. 8Multi-dimensional Contextual Conditions-driven Mutually Exclusive Learning for Explainable AI in Decision-Making
possible to take an optimized result under consideration of
contextual conditions such as time window as time interval,
context as lookahead search depth of phase, and decision
criteria. If they are deployed in an environment to make a
mutually exclusive decision, then decision-making process
(Figure 2) Graph-based Evolving Structure in AI becomes more intricate. The achieved goals can be mutually
Learning excluded at a particular moment.
3.1.2 based AI learning 3.2 White-box AI vs. Black-box AI
As in mutually exclusive decision-making, for critical In MEL, the process is based on the sequential reduction
decision-making, it needs to guarantee finding an optimized of alternatives by pruning branches through the selectively
solution by pruning branches as alternatives under chosen contextual conditions. Tree-based MEL can provide
considerable contextual conditions. As illustrated in Figure 3, the pruning histories as explanations in white-box AI. On
to address mutually exclusive decision-making, tree-based the other hand, RL is based on the improvement of reward
structure for reasoning is adopted in this research. In to achieve the goal depending on human feedback, reward
mutually exclusive decision-making, there is no intersection and so on, using graph-evolving structure as black-box AI as
among branches as paths to reach a goal. To achieve the in Figure 4. There are limitations that can not provide any
goal, it is necessary to determine the choice of branches explanations how to reach the goal. As black-box learning,
based on the tree-based structure under consideration of RL is based on probability for providing more reliable and
contextual conditions. accurate solution through the verification and cross-reference
with human such as ChatGPT using LLM. RL forced to
achieve better goals rather than the provision of explanation.
So, the learning algorithm focuses on identifying a better
goal regardless of how to reach the goal.
(Figure 3) Tree-based Structure in AI Learning
As in Figure 3, the bold lines are chosen paths to reach (Figure 4) Graph-based Structure in Black-box AI
a goal and the dotted lines are pruned paths. For instance,
if the reached goal is ‘1’, then the chosen nodes are ‘12,’ In AlphaGo, learning is based on SL and RL. SL is
and ’121.’ The pruned nodes are ‘2,’ ’11,’ and ‘122.’ The adopted human expert knowledge for position moves. RL is
chosen paths might be used to provide explanations with adopted for value networks to find optimal position through
pruned contextual conditions. In the decision-making, evaluating board positions. AlphaGo is also developed as a
choosing branches to be pruned from the tree-based structure kind of black-box AI, but it assumes that problems have
can lead to an unrecoverable decision because of exclusive optimal solutions even if there is enormous search space. As
decision-making problem. So, it is important to provide why the rigid problem, the learning of goal seeking is based on
the nodes are chosen. To do this, it necessary to consider tree-based structure with lookahead search. The AI-model is
conditions for pruning the branches at a moment. It is also conceptually based on the assumption of the existence
한국 인터넷 정보학회(25권4호) 11Multi-dimensional Contextual Conditions-driven Mutually Exclusive Learning for Explainable AI in Decision-Making
of an optimal goal regardless of the path to reach the goal. can occur, such as a range of dates. The dates can be
On the other side, mutually exclusive decision-making composed of yesterday, today and tomorrow. Yesterday
needs an explanation of why and how the decision is refers to the time before the action or process happens.
reached, as it involves sacrificing other alternatives. The Tomorrow refers to the time after a particular action or
explanations can be composed of the paths by deep-diving process that are expected to happen. Today refers to the
the breadth and depth of the tree through pruning the current time when a particular action or process happens.
branches depending on considerable conditions as in The state of current is affected by the previously happened
white-box AI. actions or processes, such as the state of current is affected
by the state of the phase from yesterday.
3.3 Conditions and Situations Second, the phase is composed of actions or processes
based on contextual conditions. Actions are selected in
3.3.1 conditions
advance from all possibly considerable states in the
considered phase, taking into account contextual conditions.
The reasoning of tree-based MEL is constructed by the
The lookahead search levels of phase are the deep-dive
trace of chosen branches of the tree. The reasoning process
depths of predicted processes or actions depending on
is based on trade-off with the other choice according to the
contextual conditions. The actions or processes of the current
specified conditions. In MEL, contextual conditions are
phase can propagate to actions or processes of next phase.
composed of time window to determine the temporal
The goal can be different according to the multi-dimensional
perspective, phases as lookahead search spaces at a particular
contextual conditions such as scope of time window and the
contexts and decision criteria to prune branches. The
lookahead search space of phases. For instance, four
decision-making process might be tailored by the chosen
different situations are illustrated in Figure 5, each with a
criteria depending on contextual environments [17]. As the
distinct and considerable scope of time window and
contextual conditions to prune branches, time window and
considered levels of phase.
phases as a depth of sequence in process are considered to
Finally, the decision criteria are also used to prune the
explore deep-dive context to reach an optimal goal. In
branches to determine the path to make a decision. By the
addition, decision criteria are also proposed as a type of a
chosen criteria, the constructed path to reach a goal can be
constraint for pruning the branches in mutually exclusive
used to provide explanation for the derived output from the
decision-making. Depending on which conditions are chosen,
mutually exclusive learning.
the outcomes can be differently arison in decision-making
process.
3.3.3 figured situation
3.3.2 Multi-dimensional conditions
In mutually exclusive decision-making, it is possible to
reach the different goals depending on the particular
In MEL, to reach a goal, time window, phase and criteria
situation. To reach a goal, it is necessary to consider
are illustrated as multi-dimensional contextual conditions for
converged contextual conditions, such as the situation 
mutually exclusive decision-making.
constructed by the configuration of multi-dimensional time
First, it requires to consider time window that refers to a
window, phases and decision criteria. In MEL, the reached
specific period during which an event can occur or an
goal might change depending on which multi-dimensional
activity can be performed. Time window might be
contextual conditions are chosen as the configured conditions
considered as the range of time within which a particular
to construct the situation  as in Figure 5.
goal must be reached. It could refer to the time frame within
which a particular process or action is expected to happen.
For instance, as a multi-dimensional condition, time window
is a specified time boundary within which an event or action
12 2024. 8Multi-dimensional Contextual Conditions-driven Mutually Exclusive Learning for Explainable AI in Decision-Making
learning, if it is guaranteed to reach accurate and reliable
outputs, then it is not necessary to find an explanation of
how to reach the goal. As was discussed, it has still
limitations, such as adverse reaction stemming from the
outputs of black-box AI, including hallucinations,
confirmation bias, and spread of fake news, which highlight
the need for explainable AI. To mitigate these limitations, it
is necessary to focus and address on potential issues for
providing explanation of the decision-making process in AI
(Figure 5) Time window, Phase and Situation learning.
For the providing explanations, MEL is proposed by the
For instance, as shown in Table 1, the configured assistant as multi-dimensional contextual conditions with
situation 1 is composed of time window at a particular chosen decision criteria to prune the branches of the tree to
moment  and the considered phase . Situation 2 is obtain the goal. The derived sequential process by pruning
composed of time window including the previous time step can provide explanation of how to extract the goal in
-1, current time  and the lookahead time +1 in the phase decision-making. The explanation is based on the sequence
. In situation 3, phase  and the lookahead state of the of activated actions or processes according to the chosen
phase +1 are considered at a particular time . Situation 4 situation. If the pruning branches as the action are taken
is composed of current time  and the lookahead time +1 from the configured situation with multi-dimensional
under consideration of phase , the lookahead state of the contextual conditions, then the agent ahead the predicted
phase +1 and state of the phase after the next phase +2. next phase to find optimal policy. The history of the chosen
processes can be used as an explanation of how to reach the
(Table 1) The illustrations of Situations with goal.
Multi-Dimensional Time window and In MEL, it is not possible for multiple actions to occur
Phase
simultaneously in mutually exclusive environments. If an
Multi-dimension action is chosen for the selection of a branch, then the other
Situation Time Window Phase
branches will be excepted and pruned by the criteria. The
Situation 1  
sequence of decision-making and the considered
Situation 2 -1, , +1 
multi-dimensional conditions used to provide explanation of
Situation 3  , +1
how to reach the goal.
Situation 4 , +1 , +1, +2
4. MEL-based Decision Making
In MEL, to derive the goal, the situation is configured by
the multi-dimensional conditions. In MEL, there is no the
In MEL with tree-based structure, the inference process
best or better output unlike ChatGPT, but there is the
for the explanation are composed of the sequence of the
optimal outcome depending on the considered situation
chosen branches, which is one of the possibly extracted
including multi-dimensional conditions at a particular
episodes with the constructed decision paths depending on
moment.
the configured situations composed of multi-dimensional
contextual conditions.
3.4 Explanations
Definition 1 (Multi-dimensional ContextualCondition)
Multi-dimensional ContextualCondition  is composed
To solve the given problems, AI processes can be
of ‘Phase,’ ‘TimeWindow,’ and ‘DecisionCriteria.’
automatically activated for the decision-making. In AI
한국 인터넷 정보학회(25권4호) 13Multi-dimensional Contextual Conditions-driven Mutually Exclusive Learning for Explainable AI in Decision-Making
 (1)     ≥
± ±
  (6)
 is a finite set of multi-dimensional contextual
conditions as in Equation (1).
, where  is time condition, ± is a considerable state
Definition 2 (Phase)  is phase that is composed of ±
of time condition (previous, current, lookahead) to construct
actions. These are propagated by the results derived from the
timeframe.
previous phase or multi-dimensional contextual conditions as
If  is 0, then it refers the current time. If  is 1, then
in Equation (2).
it refers to the lookahead time. If  is -1, then it refers to
   (2) the previous time of the current.
 
Definition 7 (Criteria) Criteria  is a finite set of the
 , where  is a set of actions of the  phase chosen criteria for MEL. It is represented as in Equation (7).

with multi-dimension.
  ≥ (7)
Definition 3 (TimeWindow) TimeWindow  is  
specified by the time frame within which an event or action
The criteria are used to prune the branches in MEL.
can occur, such as a range of time as in Equation (3).
Definition 8 (Situation) Situation  is composed of
phases and time. It is represented as in Equation (8).
    
 
 (3)
    
 
 (8)
 , where  is a set of time with multi-dimension.

Definition 4 (DecisionCriteria) DecisionCriteria  is
 .

used to prune branches for mutually exclusive
decision-making. It is represented as in Equation (4).
The phases are used to the paths to reach a goal in
decision-making process. It is a kind of a map of decision
  
  processes from the  phase to the  phase including
 (4)
actions depending on the  decision criteria as in Figure 6.
 , where  is a set of criteria with multi-

dimension.
, where  is the  decision criteria used in exclusive

decision-making process and comprised of a set of the used (Figure 6) Phase and DecisionCriteria
criteria to reach a goal.
Definition 5 (Action) Action  is a finite set of actions Definition 9 (Value function) Value function    has
or processes propagated depending on contextual conditions the maximum value over all considered situations at the
to reach a goal. It is simply represented as in Equation (5). moment as in Equation (9).
   (5)    π π   (9)
 is a set of actions that occur at a phase to reach the goal. Definition 10 (Episode) Episode  is composed of a
Definition 6 (Time) Time  is a finite set of time sequence of phases that include actions according to the
boundaries. It is represented as in Equation (6). multi-dimensional contextual conditions. It is a set of history
14 2024. 8Multi-dimensional Contextual Conditions-driven Mutually Exclusive Learning for Explainable AI in Decision-Making
of chosen phases for making an mutually exclusive decision In Figure 8, for instance, phase  is prunned by the
as in Equation (10). criteria  . As the result, pahse  is selected.  is pruned
  
by criteria  and phase  is selected.  is pruned by
  
       (10)
  criteria  and  is selected. So, the chosen branch 
 
is composed of  and  such as 
    
The episode is composed of the sequence of the chosen
.
  
phases.
Definition 11 (Probability) Probability  is a phase
transition probability matrix, it is represented as in Equation
(11).
 
 
  =      (11)
 is the  phase and  is criteria from the  phase

to the  phase. So,  is the  phase  as a next
 
phase. The   is determined by chosen branch   by (Figure 8) Chosen Branch by Pruning
pruning. Probability is for phase transition as in Figure 7.
Definition 13 (Pruning function) Pruning function ,
as a kind of the step function, is defined as in Equation
(13).
 
 
  

     

(13)
    
   
As in Figure 8, the chosen branch  is composed of
  and  by the pruning function, the selected
  
branches are as follows:  

   On the other hand, the
 
pruned branches are as follows:  

(Figure 7) Probability of Phase Transition
  
 
Definition 14 (Utility function) Utility function  as a
Definition 12 (ChosenBranch) ChosenBranch  is a
predicted utility to reach a goal is composed of phases as
finite set of the chosen branches by pruning as in Figure 8
alternatives of phase  as in Equation (14).
and Equation (12). 
    ∑     (14)
    (12)
 ∑  ,  is the  level of phase
   
한국 인터넷 정보학회(25권4호) 15Multi-dimensional Contextual Conditions-driven Mutually Exclusive Learning for Explainable AI in Decision-Making
and  is the  criteria from the  level of phase to the

 level of phase.
5. Illustration and Verification
5.1 Illustration
There are many illustrations as mutually exclusive
problems that need exclusive decision-making. One of them
is the employment process as in Figure 9. In hiring process,
we can assume that there are two candidates who have
different strength. To make a decision for hiring only one
candidate, it is necessary to consider configured situation
with multi-dimensional contextual conditions including time
window, lookahead phases and criteria for pruning branches.
To do this, it is necessary to consider the hiring
environments for the company. One of the candidates has
strength for the general computer tasks. Another is
specialized on AI tasks. Only one employee can be hired. In
the current environment, the vacancy is opened for the
position of a computer specialist to process general
computing tasks. However, in the near future, it is expected
to hire employee who can handle AI tasks. It is also
necessary to consider contexts such as the current conditions
of manpower supply and demand in the company. The
considerable contexts can be related to the company’s needs
for either a person who handles general computer tasks or
an AI specialist.
(Figure 9) Employment Process as the Mutually
For the processing of MEL, Figure 9 shows decision tree
Exclusive Problem
that has two branches which are completely mutually
exclusive because there is no intersection between them.
For the mutually exclusive decision-making, as first phase will be stopped. However, if it is difficult to
multi-dimensional contextual conditions, it is important to make a decision, then it is necessary to consider more
determine time window such as ‘current(),’ ‘previous(-1)’ contextual conditions such as the lookahead of the next
and ‘lookahead(+1).’ In addition, it is necessary to consider phase. So, it is important to determine to what search level
phases with actions. Phases are composed of lookahead of phase will be chosen in MEL. The actions of the second
search depths of phases. As in Figure 9, phase with levels phase as lookahead phase will be expected to propagate
of the tree is composed of the first and second phase such from the first phase. The second phase  is composed

as  and  . As search levels or depths of the tree, of ‘GW,’ ‘SP,’ and ‘pc11’ such as     
     
the first phase   is composed of ‘CS’ and ‘AI’ such as ‘GW’ refers to the ‘general workers’ and ‘SP’ refers to the
    as in Equation (2). ‘AI specialist.’
  
For instance, if it is possible to make a decision of who If the company has a demand plan to hire an AI
will be hired at the moment, then the inference through the specialist in the near future, then time  is composed of
16 2024. 8Multi-dimensional Contextual Conditions-driven Mutually Exclusive Learning for Explainable AI in Decision-Making
‘current()’ and ‘lookahead(+1)’ as multi-dimensional criteria  from  to  . So,  of  as a
    
conditions at the first phase  . The ‘current()’ refers to next phase is determined by choosing branch function       
the current environment of the company and the ‘lookahead
as in Equation (12). The phase  is pruned by the time

( +1)’ refers to the future environment. As in Equation (3)
window  ={ ,  } and  ={ }, the lookahead
    
and (6), is comprised of  for  and 
   of the phase  is  with criteria  .
  
for  .  can be comprised of ‘current( )’ and
  As in Equation (13), by the pruning function , the
‘lookahead( +1)’ time dimension such as  ={ ,  }, selected phases are as follows: 
where   is time window of phase  , ranging from   . The pruned phases are as follows:
current time   to the lookahead time   as in Equation (3)  ,  ,  . The
and (6).
selected situation is  such as   .
  
It is possible to consider ‘current,’ and ‘future’ as the
The utility function  of the selected situation  is

decision criteria such as    as in
  composed of selected phases at each level of the inference
Equation (7). If the company focuses on hiring workers for
tree as in Equation (14). For instance,  is composed of

the future, then the criteria for the decision can be the
phases  and  such as     at  . The
     
‘future’ for the demand plan. So, the considered both phases
utility function can be extracted from using the probabilities
are     and     .
       as follows:    
The selected phase is  in  and  is selected in
 
  
    ,    


as AI specialist with strength of job position in     
Figure 9. It takes into account the time window such as and     .
 ={ ,  } as ‘current’ and ‘lookahead’ time. For  is composed of phases  ,  and  such
      
phase  , the time window is  ={ } with as      at the second level of the
criteria ‘current’ at the moment. It means that it does not
employment process. The utilities of
have to lookahead next phase at the moment. The derived
    ,
result can differ when considering only time  versus when
  
     , and
considering both time and  
    are compared. If
As in Equation (8), the situation is composed of the   
considerable phase and time window at a particular moment.     has max value   , then
A set of situations such as    … can be
 is
sel e cte d  a s  o n e  o
f
 t h e
phases. At each
l eve
l, the

derived as follows:  =       and more.
      summation of probabilities of all phases at each level is 1
Among them, situation    is selected by the max value such as ∑   . The utility function to
such as as in Equation (9). The selected support the proposed mutually exclusive decision-making
   is  with criteria  at  and  at can be presented by   as in
       
 . Equation (14).

As in Equation (10), episode  is a set of episodes that Finally, AI specialist is employed in the employment
are comprised of phases extracted from each situation. Each process. It provides an explanation of how to reach the goal
episode is composed of a sequence of phases selected by by the chosen branch  composed of  as in
 
each situation. The selected episode  is composed of the
 Equation (12). The sequence of phases used to provide the
phases of  with phases  and  .
   explanation why AI specialist is employed for the demand
Each phase has transition probability as in Equation (11). plan of the company with criteria ‘future’ at  and

For instance, as in        

is the ‘current’ at  .
phase transition probability from  to  , with
 
한국 인터넷 정보학회(25권4호) 17Multi-dimensional Contextual Conditions-driven Mutually Exclusive Learning for Explainable AI in Decision-Making
5.2 Verification explanations of how to reach goals, which are composed of
sequence of pruning branches by criteria. Therefore, it is
In tree-based learning MEL, the goal can be reached by
important to consider how to determine the lookahead search
pruning branches under consideration of specific conditions
level for finding feasible or optimal explainable solutions
such as proposed multi-dimensional contextual conditions at
effectively under multi-dimensional contextual conditions.
a particular moment.
In MEL, tree-based structure is applied to reduce the
6. Conclusion
search space from the enormous number of alternative cases.
MEL can reduce the search space rather than graph-evolving
The proposed MEL focuses on solving the mutually
learning that considers all possible states in the entire
exclusive problem in decision-making. In MEL, according to
environment to reach the better goal. Tree-based search
the given multi-dimensional contextual conditions, the
engine is applied to reduce the search space through selected
optimized goal at a particular moment will be reached with
actions by lookahead search as in AlphaGo. Graph-based
explanations.
evolving AI learning is based on search space n× matrics
As briefly discussed, AlphaGo exemplifies a tree-rigid
learning, but search space of tree-based learning is less than
model that searches for optimal solutions. ChatGPT as
n× matrics because it is based on the pruning of branches
graph-evolving model uses heuristic algorithms that can be
for mutually exclusive decision-making.
refined through human feedback and reward. RL based on
To derive a goal, it is important to determine which
the reward hypothesis is grounded on fine-tuning as in
phases should be looked ahead in the tree. The search space
ChatGPT. RL is training process by the trial and error
will increase depending on the size of the lookahead search
through interacting with environments including contexts and
levels. If the size of level for diving into the search phase
receiving reward signals. Adaptive AI is emphasizing
is increased, the search space to achieve the goal will
autonomous evolution. These differences highlight the
exponentially expand.
varying approaches to AI.
To reduce the search space, it is necessary to prune
These models focus on finding goals as optimal or
branches by criteria. The criteria chosen for any search
enhanced solution with human-guided improvements. In
process are indeed closely related to the size of the search
ChatGPT, the goal is consistently reinforced by data and
space. The effective determination of the criteria affects to
human reward because it is based on graph-evolving
the search effort, performance efficiency and the
structure as a kind of black-box AI. On the other hand,
optimization of the reached goal. The learning for the
AlphaGo is assumed that it has a optimal solution, even if
selection of criteria can be trained from a variety of cases
it needs a significant amount of efforts to achieve the goal
such as cumulative results and rewards with contextual
which is based on probabilistic facts.
conditions through MEL.
In this research, mutually exclusive problems are focused
In MEL, tree-based structure is also applied to provide
on, which differ from these addresses by the previously
explanation of how to reach a goal. The sequential pruning
discussed approaches. In everyday life, the problems we face
processes under consideration of multi-dimensional
often require making mutually exclusive decisions. MEL is
contextual conditions provide the explanation of how to
proposed to solve the mutually exclusive problem in
reach a goal such as white-box AI. On the other hand,
decision-making, which is tree-based structure. The goal can
graph-evolving learning RL can not provide any explanations
be reached by trade-off among mutually exclusive
for the reached goal such as black-box AI.
alternatives of the tree according to the specific contextual
The effectiveness and efficiency of MEL are depending
conditions. So, in MEL, decision-making is based on
on the finite search spaces that are determined by
pruning branches under consideration of multi- dimensional
multi-dimensional conditions. It can reduce the enormous
contextual conditions to achieve the goal in tree-based
search space. In addition, tree-based structure MEL provide
structure. As white-box AI, the pruning process can provide
18 2024. 8Multi-dimensional Contextual Conditions-driven Mutually Exclusive Learning for Explainable AI in Decision-Making
explanation how to reach the goal. prune the branches. The learning process involves how to
In MEL, the decision-making process needs to prune weight the criteria for pruning branches, which levels are
mutually exclusive alternatives to reach a goal. To do this, considered as contextual conditions, how to optimally
multi-dimensional contextual conditions are considered, configure the situation, and other factors according to the
which are composed of the time window, phase including specified environment at a particular moment. The tree-based
actions or processes, and decision criteria. For mutually approach makes it possible to provide explanations to reach
exclusive decision-making, the multi-dimensional contextual the goals. Verification through experimentation is also
conditions are composed of time window as the temporal needed to assess the effectiveness of the proposed MEL.
perspective, the significant lookahead levels of phases and
criteria to choose or prune alternatives.
References
As the multi-dimensional contextual conditions, time
window is comprised of previous, current and lookahead
[1] Y. Wu, L. Wang, C. Kai, and M. Peng, “Dynamics-
time. For instance,  is current which is related to at the
Based Location Prediction and Neural Network
moment. ≥ refers to previous events, actions, or
Fine-Tuning for Task Offloading in Vehicular
processes that have already occurred.  refers to
Networks,” KSII Transactions on Internet and
lookahead events, actions, or processes that are yet to
Information Systems, Vol. 17, No. 12, pp. 3416-
happen. The phase is composed differently depending on
3435, 2023.
how many dimensions are included in the lookahead phase.
https://dx.doi.org/10.3837/tiis.2023.12.011
Criteria are selected whenever it is necessary to prune the
[2] OpenAI, “GPT-4 Technical Report,” Cornell University,
branches of the tree. The configuration of multi-dimensional
2023.
contextual conditions is proposed as the configured situation.
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2303.08774
It shows the specifically finite environment to reach a goal [3] L. Zhou, Y. Duan, and W. Wei, “Research on the
in the mutually exclusive decision-making at a particular Financial Data Fraud Detection of Chinese Listed
moment. Depending on the chosen situation, different goals Enterprises by Integrating Audit Opinions,” KSII
might be reached through mutually exclusive decision- Transactions on Internet and Information Systems,
making. Vol. 17, No. 12, pp. 3218-3241, 2023.
MEL adopt the tree-based learning model for providing https://dx.doi.org/10.3837/tiis.2023.12.001
explanation for the derived goal with specific conditions. [4] D. Silver, A. Huang, C. J. Maddison, A. Guez, L.
The goal depends on the policy of pruning branches, which Sifre, G. van den Driessche, J. Schrittwieser, I.
can be dynamically changed by specific multi-dimensional Antonoglou, V. Panneershelvam, M. Lanctot, S.
contextual conditions at any particular moment. Through the Dieleman, D. Grewe, J. Nham, N. Kalchbrenner, I.
pruning process, the explanation of how to reach a goal is Sutskever, T. Lillicrap, M. Leach, K. Kavukcuoglu,
represented by the chosen episode of selected branches. As T. Graepel, and D. Hassabis, “Mastering the Game
one of the mutually exclusive problems, the illustrated of Go with Deep Neural Networks and Tree Search,”
employment process demonstrates how to reach the goal in Nature, Vol. 529, pp. 484-489, 2016.
mutually exclusive decision-making and provides an https://www.nature.com/articles/nature16961
explanation by pruning branches using MEL. [5] D. Gunning, E. Vorm, J. Y. Wang, and M. Turek,
Furthermore, it is necessary to implement and experiment “DARPA's explainable AI (XAI) program: A
with the proposed MEL for mutually exclusive retrospective,” Applied AI Letters, Vol. 2, No. 4,
decision-making and apply it to solve real-world problems. 2021.
Through the experiment and interacting with environments, https://www.researchgate.net/publication/356781652_
it is necessary to train the learning processes with reward DARPA_%27s_explainable_AI_XAI_program_A_retr
signals such as multi-dimensional conditions and criteria to ospective
한국 인터넷 정보학회(25권4호) 19Multi-dimensional Contextual Conditions-driven Mutually Exclusive Learning for Explainable AI in Decision-Making
[6] J. Wiles, and L. Perri, “Why Adaptive AI Should https://doi.org/10.1145/3514094.3534164
Matter to Your Business,” Gartner, 2022. [12] V. Belle, and I. Papantonis, “Principles and Practice
https://www.gartner.com/en/articles/why-adaptive-ai-s of Explainable Machine Learning,” Frontiers in Big
hould-matter-to-your-business Data, Vol. 4, 2021.
[7] S. Ali, T. Abuhmed, S. El-Sappagh, K. Muhammad, https://doi.org/10.3389/fdata.2021.688969
J. M. Alonso-Moral, R. Confalonieri, R. Guidotti, J. [13] H. J. Lee, “Mutually Exclusive Decision-Making
D. Ser, N. Díaz-Rodríguez, and F. Herrera, Learning of AI based on Contexts,” KSII The 18th
“Explainable Artificial Intelligence (XAI): What we Asia Pacific International Conference on Information
know and what is left to attain Trustworthy Artificial Science and Technology(APIC-IST), 2023.
Intelligence,” Information Fusion, Vol. 99, pp. 1-52, https://www.google.com/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&
2023. source=web&cd=&cad=rja&uact=8&ved=2ahUKEwi
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.inffus.2023.101805 Kpufe9NeGAxXIp1YBHed2DcoQFnoECBkQAQ&url
[8] H. A. Simon, “Administrative Behavior: A Study of =https%3A%2F%2Fapicist.org%2Fmedia%3Fkey%3
Decision-making Processes in Administrative Dsite%2Fapicist2023%2FProceedings_of_APIC-IST_
Organizations,” The Oxford Handbook of Classics in 2023.pdf&usg=AOvVaw3rvPVogs6y_HJK_Up-s93r&
Public Policy and Administration, pp. 12-21, 2016. opi=89978449
https://doi.org/10.1093/oxfordhb/9780199646135.013. [14] G. Campitelli,and F. Gobet, “Herbert Simon's
22 Decision-Making Approach: Investigation of Cognitive
[9] J. Simonsen, and H. A. Simon, “Administrative Processes in Experts,” Brunel University, 2010.
Behavior How organizations can be understood in https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1037/a0021256
terms of decision processes,” Computer Science, [15] V. Harish, F. Morgado, A. D. Stern, and S. Das,
Roskilde University, 1994. “Artificial Intelligence and Clinical Decision Making:
https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/Herbert-A.-Simon The New Nature of Medical Uncertainty,” Academic
%3A-Administrative-Behavior-how-Can-Simonsen-Si Medicine, Vol. 96, No. 1, pp. 31-36, 2021.
mon/a78c493ee0e8c9dfe7bd0fbaa2ef0ca2c8aa4562 https://dx.doi.org/10.1097/ACM.0000000000003707
[10] Gartner, “Information Technology Glossary. Adaptive [16] C. H. Choi, “KYNDI,” Artificial Intelligence Times,
AI,” Gartner Glossary, 2024. 2021.
https://www.gartner.com/en/information-technology/gl https://www.aitimes.kr/news/articleView.html?idxno=
ossary/adaptive-ai 20974
[11] A. Bertrand, R. Belloum, J. R. Eagan, and W. [17] Y. Li, “Knowledge Recommendation Based on Dual
Maxwell, “How Cognitive Biases Affect XAI-assisted Channel Hypergraph Convolution,” KSII Transactions
Decision-making: A Systematic Review,” In Proc. of on Internet and Information Systems, Vol. 17, No.
the 2022 AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Ethics, and 11, pp. 2903-2923, 2023.
Society (AIES), 2022. https://dx.doi.org/10.3837/tiis.2023.11.001
20 2024. 8Multi-dimensional Contextual Conditions-driven Mutually Exclusive Learning for Explainable AI in Decision-Making
◐ 저 자 소 개 ◑
Hyun Jung Lee
received her Ph. D. degree from the Department of Management Engineering of Korea Advanced
Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST) in 2004. From 2005 to 2017, she was a Research
Professor with Sungkyunkwan University, Korea University and Yonsei University. In 2017, she joined
the Department of Economic Research at Goyang City Institute (formerly Goyang Research Institute) as
a Senior Research Fellow. Her long-term research theme is modeling and developing Intelligent
Information Systems (IIS) and Electronic Commerce (EC) within management information systems. Her
primary research interests are AI-based decision-making, effective information processing to online
market with rigorous application of a multiple levels-of-analysis perspective, AI-based customized
product recommendations on online market, developing semantic web service applications in knowledge
management, delivery and fulfillment issues on ubiquitous computing, cost reduction decision using
information processing and research methodologies. She published several papers on Decision Support
Systems, Soft Computing Journal, and so on.
한국 인터넷 정보학회(25권4호) 21Copyrightof Journalof InternetComputing&Servicesisthepropertyof KoreanSocietyfor
InternetInformationanditscontentmaynotbecopiedor emailedtomultiplesitesor posted
toalistservwithoutthecopyrightholder's express writtenpermission.However, users may
print,download,or emailarticlesfor individualuse.